me, my family and neighbour.
look and talk about the pictures.
teaching instructions.
complete the activities of this lesson by decribing the pictures.
you should tell students about the instructions because they cannot read them in their initial days.
activities.
know yourself.
identify your food.
identify the place you live.
identify your clothes.
i am a girl.
i am a boy.
my family.
make your students tell the relation and name of family members by describing the given pictures in the activities and lesson.
also, make them say the number of family members.
identify the given person below.
what is your name ?
who are there in your family ?
how many members are there in your family ?
what is the name of your mother ?
tell the name of your father.
what do you say to father’s father ?
what do you say to your father’s mother ?
there are grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, brothers, bhauju and sisters in my home.
my belongings.
observe how properly have the students kept their personal belongings or not.
teach them how to take care of their personal belongings if they have not kept properly.
look, take care your personal belongings in a way it can be.
i will take care of my belongings myself.
my friends.
show students different pictures given in the lesson and let them describe what is shown in the picture.
then teach them to learn, study and sit together with their friends.
look at the pictures and say which one is a good habit.
what should you do to live together with your friends.
i work together with my friends.
our traditions, social values and norms.
respect our seniors.
you shoud tell the instructions given in the lesson.
there may be several other things apart form just respecting.
you can be show by acting out the local ways of respecting.
even you can make your students act out these ways given above or some other ways in the class.
recognize the people in the following pictures and how should you respect your seniors ? say.
act out and show how you respect your mother, father.
act out and show how you respect your teachers.
i respect my elders.
love junior ones.
the pictures of loving younger ones are given in this lesson.
it is necessary to teach students with more examples based on local customs.
tell, what are they doing in the given picture below.
who is loving whom in the above picture ?
how do your parents love you ?
how do you love your juniors ?
show it by acting out.
i will love my junior ones.
clothes.
choose by looking at the pictures.
make your student say the names of the given clothes one by one.
their names are as follows.
which clothes do you like to wear ?
tell the name of the clothes by looking at the picture.
what types of dresses do your family members wear ?
members of my family wear different types of clothes.
household work.
the pictures given above are only samples relating to household works.
depending on the contexts, the children can tell about different works at home.
after showing them different activities carried out by parents at home ask them to tell about it.
ask them to tell similar works carried out by their parents at home.
who are doing what in the pictures given above ?
what are people doing in the following pictures ?
what do you do at home ?
who is doing what at your home ?
what help do you do in the work of others ?
my father, mother and sisters do different types of works at home.
works of neighbourhood.
the pictures given above are only samples relating to works of neighbourhood.
give some more examples of different works of neighbourhood and make students discuss about them accordingly.
what are people doing in the given pictures of this lesson.
tell any five works of your neighbour.
tell whether work done at your home and work done by neighbours are same or different ?
what are they doing in the following pictures ?
my neighbours do different types of works.
social problem solutions.
help needy ones.
encourage students to help the needy people at their home keeping the family background of students in view.
ask stduents to act out some roles that we show while helping needy people.
conduct the activities that encourage students all the time.
look at the following pictures and tell what type of help they need.
match the following pictures.
i will help needy people.
help disabled people.
engage students to act out the role of people with visual, walking, hearing, talking and other types of physical disability and advice them how to help such disable people.
but remember you must not humiliate students with disability in the class.
look at the pictures below and tell which is right and which is wrong.
who needs what ?
i will help disable people.
civic sense.
take help.
help from mother.
help from father.
help from uncle.
help from aunt.
ask students to say what people are doing in the given pictures.
make them act out the role of helping each other when they cannot do some works themselves.
take them to a workplace where a number of works are being done, and make them help others if possible.
look at the following works and in which work do you need help ?
mark the correct one.
what help do you do to others at home ?
in which works do your parents help you ?
which works can you do ?
i take other's help.
look, recognize and read.
i help my mother.
i help my father.
i help my sister.
i help my grandfather.
make students tell who is helping in what works in the above pictures.
divide the class into groups and involve them in role play of heling others, and teach them to help each other.
who is helping what in the given pictures ?
in which works do you help your brother and sister ?
in which works can you help ?
what are the things at your home ?
tick the things that are at your home.
i will help others.
pan.
plate.
glass.
cooker.
television.
radio.
bed.
make your students say the names of things in the given pictures.
discuss with them what things they have at their home.
then make them keep things in the right place.
what are the things at your home ?
look at the pictures below and tick the things that are at your home.
draw a picture of anything that you like most at your home.
tick for the right one and cross for the wrong ones.
i take care of the belongings at my home.
things of school.
classroom.
copy.
book.
blackboard.
tap.
playground.
restroom.
toilet.
garden.
make students observe the things that they find around the school and make them say each thing one by one.
make them clean the school and take care of its things.
what things are there in your classroom ?
bench.
desk.
chair.
table.
chalk.
blackboard.
duster.
map.
ball.
photo.
chart.
mark for the things that are available at your school.
pick up and put the dirty things and a piece of paper of your classroom in the proper place.
which things are needed to clean your school ?
i use desk, bench, table, chair and blackboard carefully.
i clean playground, tap of schol.
i get up early in the morning.
i wash my face and hands.
i arrange my bed.
i take my meal.
i wear my uniform.
i go to school.
i come back after studying.
i change my dress.
i wash my hands and legs.
i will eat snack.
then i will study.
ask them one by one what works do they do daily in their houses and teach them to do daily works by themselves.
fill in the blanks.
i go to school after getting up.
i change my dress after returning from the school.
i go to school with friends.
i eat snack after returning from school.
sing the song given in the lessson with your teacher.
i do my work myself at home.
my duties at school.
i sit in the classroom.
i study with my friends.
i eat my tiffin in the noon.
i play with my friends.
i keep school's surrounding clean.
i also keep my classroom clean.
observe students' works at school and provide feedback if you find any weaknesses.
divide the class into groups and observe whether they are playing together or not.
what do you do after going to school ?
which sort of games do you play with your friends ?
which is the right work ?
where do you throw wastes that you find around your school ?
which thing do you like most at your school ? write.
i read, write, clean and playwith my friends at school.
our earth.
land around the home.
this is hasana's house.
hasana's house is on high land.
the tree is on the slope.
this is my house.
my house is in low land.
there is a garden nearby the house.
the garden is plain.
do the activities of the lesson by making students observe the nearby land which consists of high, low and plain land.
show students different forms of land.
what type of land is there in the following pictures ?
write down.
shed is in slope place.
my home is in highland place.
my friend’s home is in low land place.
my garden is in plain place.
draw the picture.
your home.
your friend's home.
my home is in low land.
hasana’s home is in high land.
aja’s home is in plain.
land around school.
look, read and talk about the pictures.
this is my school.
my school is in low land.
there is also a garden in front of my school.
the ground is plain.
amu's school is in high land.
amu's school is little bit far away from her home.
first, make your students read the lesson and after that take them to outside the class.
make them observe different forms of land around their school.
finally, make them do the given exercises.
which kind of land is your school located on ?
what things are there around your school ?
draw a line on the following numbers showing the way from your house to school.
what type of way do you follow when you go to school from your home ?
draw a picture and show your teacher.
my school is in low land.
amu's school is in hill and palpasaya's school is in plain.
map of home.
sichu is sitting outside today.
her friends and teachers are also sitting outside.
everybody is looking around the school.
there were tall, small, and new, old houses nearby.
sichu is looking at the houses outside and is sketching the exact map of those houses.
the house of the map though nice was small.
the outside houses were big.
the outside houses were made of bricks.
sichu sketched the map of home with a pencil and she thought how her home is.
take the students outside of their class and show different types of houses around the school and make them sketch the map of houses.
tear the drawn map in to pieces and make them join together again.
is your home new or old?
how many storeys is your house, and how many rooms are there ?
which direction is your home located from your school ?
go out of the class and observe the houses outside and practise to draw map of one house that you saw.
cut the wood or thick paper in the form of house and make the map of house in your exercise book.
look carefully at the maps made by your friends.
the things used in building house are given below.
write down their names.
what did you draw the figure of the house with ?
drawing picture is the process of exactly copying the shapes or sizes of any things and places.
map of school.
sichu is sitting separately and drawing a map of school by looking at it today.
her school and home are nearby not far.
her school is near the village.
her school's name is "jagatsundar school".
bishnumati river is flowing in front of jagatsundar school.
there are wide roads on the left and right of the river.
272.
273.
provide different pictures to the students.
make students trace the picture by placing a thin paper on top of it.
similarly, make students draw different maps by joining dots and numbers.
ask them to visit their own school and make them practise to draw simple maps of their school.
give them sticks so that they can practise of making house or school.
how is your school ?
what is there in front of your school ?
how many rooms are there at your school ?
what things can you see from your school?
look at the following pictures of tools and say which are required and which are not required to draw pictures.
try to draw a picture of your school like sichu have drawn.
i can draw the picture of my school.
this is sichu's classroom.
sichu is studying at grade one.
this classroom is wide.
clear light enters from the window.
there is a blackboard used by teacher to teach inside the classroom.
there are also enough desks and benches.
there is also one square table used by teacher.
there is also one rack to keep student's.
make students draw different lines with the help of ruler.
ask them to observe their own classroom to find out different things there.
how is your classroom ?
what are the things that you have in your classroom ?
almirah.
thal.
computer.
practise to draw the map of your classroom.
also, look at the map of your friends and show you rmap to them.
our past.
my birthday.
my name is palpasa kasa.
my home is at asan street in kathmandu district.
i was born at 9’o clock on suday.
now i am 6 years old.
make students to write their date of birth and place with the help of their parents.
fill in the blanks with appropriate words.
after saturday sunday comes.
after october/november november/december comes.
there are 12 months in a year.
write down your birth place.
complete the following table about yourself and tell your friends.
birth year.
like above, draw a table about your two friends and show them to your teacher.
what day, date, month and year is today ?
write and show.
i can say my birthday and my birth place.
my ancestors.
my grandfather’s name is jyoti narayan manandhar.
my grandmother’s name is chini maya manandhar.
my grandfather and grandmother have three sons and two daughter.
my father is the youngest son.
myfather’s name is sanu babu sayami.
my mother’s name is bhagban devi manandhar.
my parents live in kathmandu khusibun.
i also live with father and mother.
i along with my father and mother came to live at khusibun from sorhakhutte in nepal sambat 1123.
my name is sarbin sayami.
my wife's name is sangita sayami.
my son's name shreyansh sayami.
present a chart of three generations of your own in the class and make your students prepare a chart which contains three generations like yours.
what to say to whom ?
father’s father should be called grandfather.
father’s mother should be called grandmother.
father’s brother is called uncle.
father’s sister is called aunty.
i can say the name of my three generations.
the head of my family.
my mother teaches at school.
my mother buys books and copies for me.
my mother also buys necessary food required for home.
my mother buys clothes for all family members.
my mother looks after all family members.
my mother assigns resposibilities of work to all family members.
my mother is the head of my family.
ask students to tell all works that their family members carry out at home.
based on the work who is the head of the family ? ask them to find.
who is the head of your family ?
what does the head do at your home ?
which pictures match to the work done by your head of family ?
who does what at your home ?
write in table.
buying and bringing food.
buying and bringing clothes.
assigning responsibilities of work.
taking and giving money.
buying and providing books and copy.
i know the head of my family.
my maternal uncle's home.
my mother's maternal home is in kathmandu.
my mother has two brothers.
he is my maternal uncle.
i go to my maternal uncle’s home in different festivals like dashain, tihar with my mother.
one maternal aunt is there in maternal uncles's home.
maternal uncle and aunt both love me very much.
ask children about their maternal uncle’s home one by one.
make them to say the names of their maternal uncles and aunts.
biska is one of the biggest and cherishable festival of khowpa country.
where is your maternal uncle’s home ?
who are there at your maternal uncle’s home ?
ask your maternal uncle's and aunt's name and write.
what should be said to them ?
mother’s younger brother is called uncle.
mother’s elder brother is called uncle.
mother’s father is called grandfather.
mother’s mother is called grandmother.
ask your friend nearby about his/her maternal uncle’s home and write.
draw a picture of your maternal uncle’s home.
my mother’s parental home is my mamaghar.
my grandmother worships after completing her morning works.
she worships by sitting in the worshipping room.
i bring worshipping things for my grandfather.
my grandfather sits in the shop.
i carry the things of the shop and showcase them outside.
my mother works at home.
i do the works assigned by my mother.
my father teaches.
i put things to be taken to school in front of my father.
my sister goes to school to study.
i provide books for her.
i provide broom, rubbing cloth and water when my brother is cleaning the room.
i try to help my family members at my home.
make students tell different works that are performed in their family while teaching this lesson.
similarly, question them about the works that they do or they cannot do.
i help my father at my home.
i help my father at office work.
i help my mother in the kitchen.
i help my mother to check patients.
what to do ?
which things are needed ?
clean the home.
cook rice.
i help in household work.
take care of your belongings, dont spoil.
i put cover in book as it might get spoiled.
i read books with care.
i keep my clothes and shoes at proper place.
i use my toothbrush properly while brushing teeth.
i use toothpaste at the right amount and never waste it.
taking care of things and saving them without wasting them is a good habit.
teach them by conducting discussion and demonstrate to take care of any thing or their personal belongings and use them properly without wasting them.
which things do you use at home and school ?
which thing matches which in the following pictures ?
how can you take care of the following things ?
name of things.
i take care of my things without wasting them.
airport is a place where recently people have been buying land to build their houses.
thats why there are still land left for cultivation.
ms. ita is one of the inhabitant of sinamangal which is very near from airport.
this is also a big ground near her home.
maize, soyabean and wheat grows in that land.
oranges and others fruits also grows.
they have also raised one cow.
cow gives milk.
ms. ita has been eating products from her ground by making popcorn, grinding soyabean and baking bread.
eating fruits grown in ones field and drinking cow's milk.
she also takes pop corn made at her home as tiffin to school.
thats why ms. ita is fine and strong.
encourage students to take home made food by asking different names of local food.
say that ready-made foods of the market are not healthy and ask them to avoid them as far as possible.
what types of foods are prepared at your home?
differentiate between homemade and foods that are found outside home.
i eat all home made food without wasting them.
rice.
vegetable.
bread.
chocolate.
milk.
noodle.
loaf.
grains.
homemade things.
even though some household things are made at our home many are brought from outside.
i wear sweater and cap knitted by my mother.
i wear sewed clothes.
i play with toys like wooden horse, elephant, dolls made by my father at home.
my aunt knitted a bag for me for carrying books.
my mother makes washing soap at the home.
the same soap is used for washing clothes.
table made by father is also used.
ask students to make a list of the things made at their home and also, encourage them to use homemade things.
tell which things are made at your home.
which of the things  are made at your home and which are made outside your home?
draw the pictures of any four homemade things.
i use homemade things.
visual arts.
you can draw picture by using  brick, stick etc.
do you also draw the picture ?
show the above pictures to the students and ask them different questions about activities and make discussion.
make them to sketch zigzag lines with fingers/small thin sticks on sand, flour, ground, etc.
make discussions about the different pictures drawn by the childrens and ask questions to them.
i will also draw a flower.
what did you make ?
ask different questions to initiate discussion about the above pictures.
ask childrens to fill the pictures with the colour they like.
things that i like.
draw any picture that you like.
show the above pictures and make discussion.
say the name of colours.
which colour do you like ?
i like red colour.
play with colour.
mixture of different colours makes many new colours.
what types of colours did you make ?
ask question about colours of different objects around them.
make them to use the colours and discuss.
tell them to make new colours from the above colours and ask them questions.
my favourite person.
collage.
tear papers, cut and paste to make pictures.
what different shapes of pictures are made from a piece of paper, paste and look.
collage is an art of making different shapes by cutting/tearing pieces of papers and pasting them on a paper.
other papers can also be used.
other papers can also be used instead of papers required to read by students.
the colour of the paper to be used should be different than the copy.
there are no rules while pasting paper, it is enough for students know how to paste.
discuss on different shapes formed while pasting.
work with clay.
how to make ?
play with clay.
add sufficient water to make it clay.
then make them prepare soft dough.
make them prepare dough to the students until they like.
put aside the mud block.
make them develop different things from mud.
letters made from clay.
i made an apple.
we like fruits.
we like animals.
never say students that the shapes made by them is not good.
make proper shape of your favorite thing.
create other shapes by joining different shapes made by students and show them.
discuss about the objects made by students and encourage them to make more such objects.
showcase different things made by students in the classroom.
i will clap.
i move my feet and waist.
in this way, practise it many times.
with the first clap practise to move only the right leg while making them dance rhythm of the song.
then make her move left leg only.
i will practise moving my hands to dance.
small.
less.
big.
more.
more.
flower.
hill.
home.
temple.
high.
sleep.
i.
relatives.
we.
soul.
others.
aliens.
listen.
drink.
come.
river.
make them practise hand gestures as given in the above picture.
make them act to move their feet in rhythm according to the words of song.
children's song.
practise the song and dance based on my nepali book grade–i many times in the same way other songs and dances.
make them dance in rhythm by playing the above given song.
while making them dance move students body here and there.
acting.
look, recognize and imitate the sound as them.
tell the students to imitate the sounds and movements of birds and animals as given above.
like this, tell them to imitate sound and movements of other animals.
harmonium.
flute.
damaru.
damphu.
madal.
sahanai.
sarangi.
tungana.
tyamko.
ektare.
discuss with children about local musical instruments.
ask them to name musical instruments according to number and identify the musical instruments.
i wake up early in the  morning.
i brush my teeth and wash my face.
after that, i start to study.
i go to school after lunch.
i sit with my friends in the school.
we study and play together.
sometimes, i clean my class-room and playground along with my friends.
at other times we also visit different places.
i help my parents at home.
i do the work as they say.
sometimes i help my mother by sorting out vegetables.
i also put water.
i clean inside and outside of the house.
every one loves me.
every one says me nice, good child.
make students aware of doing their work by them-selves and assist family members in their work.
so involve them in activities of doing their work them-selves and assisting others.
what work is done in the morning, in the afternoon and in the evening?
write in table.
having breakfast.
switching the light on.
brushing teeth.
name different sorts of work done at home and in school  in the following table.
work performed at home.
work performed in school.
tick the work that you can do in the following list.
what works you can do and works you cannot ?
i do my work myself.
i help others in household work.
work of family.
hariman's father works in the field.
his mother sows the seeds of maize in the field.
hariman's family members work together in the field.
the person who works in the field is called farmer.
hariman's father and mother are also farmers.
his mother carried him bitten rice.
lasata’s father has a cloth-stall.
he sells different kinds of clothes.
one who sits in a shop is called shop-keeper.
lahana’s sister teaches in school.
everybody calls her teacher.
yechu's father works in the office.
one who works in the office is called official.
bhajuman’s father constructs houses.
one who constructs houses is called mason.
the objective of this lesson is to tell them about family members work and help them provide information about different kinds of occupation.
let the students tell their family members’ occupation and practise various activities to make familiar with different professions.
farmer works in the field.
teacher teaches in the school.
mason constructs house.
shopkeeper sits in a shop.
official works in the office.
what kinds of works do your family members do ?
write in the following table.
on what works do you help your father mother ?
act out with your friends and show.
bhajuman’s father is a mason.
his father uses hammer, thread, bell.
write the name of the things that your family-members use.
draw the pictures of two things that your family-members use.
i can tell about the work that my family-members do.
habit of caring goods.
matina is now seven years old.
she studies in class two.
matina keeps her things in the right place.
she puts cover on her books.
she does her class work as per her teacher's instruction.
after study, she keeps her books, exercise-book and pen in the school bag.
she keeps her clothes neat and clean.
she cares for her toys.
she keeps food covered.
she does not waste food.
matina borrows things from her friends in need.
once work is over, she returns them to her friends.
jamuna also lends her things to her friend.
she takes her things back after use and put thme in place.
matina has a habit of helping others.
she also ask for help from others.
aaha ! how good is matina’s habit.
since the aim of this lesson is to teach students different habits like using and caring their things, teach them by conduction of discussion and role play on the methods of using things properly and keep safely.
copy only the right work in your exercise-book.
we should love our books.
books should not be covered.
we should keep our clothes clean.
extra food should be thrown.
how do you care for your goods ?
till now what did you lend to your friend and helped ?
what did your friends lend you and helped ?
things you gave to your friends.
things your friend gave you.
i take care of things.
i lend things to friends and borrow things from them in need.
respect to neighbours.
nhuja lives in a town.
he has neighbours around.
his neighbours are all friendly.
he greets with 'namaskar' to the senior who comes to his home.
he loves the youngers.
he plays with the friends of his age.
timila lives in a village.
there are a few houses in her village.
she also knows the people very far away from her house.
she respects people who come to her house.
she asks the reason with people for visiting her home.
she also has good connection with her neighbours.
encourage students to introduce the people of their neighbourhood by using relation-addressing and respectful words.
where do you live in a town or in a village ?
are the houses clustered or sparsed around you ?
what do you call the one who lives close to your house ?
write the name of your neighbours and their works in the following table.
act out with friends to show how you greet neighbours.
write the greetings used in your family and neighbourhood as given below.
good morning, pranam.
how does nhuja receive visitors at home ?
how do you feel about timila's behaviour ?
we respect our neighbours.
living-styles of neighbours.
people of different races live in our village.
they have different costumes.
they have distinct festivals and languages.
so, our neighbours have different living-styles.
our neighbours have much cultivable land.
rice,maize, paddy, millet, soyabean are grown in the field.
they eat varieties of food grown in their fields.
they have raised cows, buffaloes, goats, pigs.
milk and meat are obtained from these animals.
our neighbours buy other food supplies from the market.
students may know the names of clothes and foods other than that given above.
so, before starting the lesson, let them speak out.
by this learning habit is developed among students.
you should also tell the names of other clothes and food items.
what sort of clothes do your neighbours wear ?
what sorts of clothes do most of your neighbour wear ?
how is your dress up different from others ?
write the name of five food items you eat.
this is how palpasa completed the table about his neighbour’s food.
i borrow rice from neighbour.
he takes green vegetables from his own garden.
i take milk from my tamed cow.
i take chilly from my own kitchen garden.
he buys meet from the shop.
you also ask and write about your neighbour’s food habit like palpasa have done.
in field paddy grows.
life-styles of neighbours are different.
milk is obtained from cow.
all neighbours take different kinds of food.
my neighbours eat different sorts of food.
they wear different kinds of clothes.
our festivals.
different festivals are celebrated in our neighbourhood.
dashain, tihar, teej are celebrated in nhiumila's house.
152.
153goddess durga is worshipped during dashain festival.
during tihar crow, dog, cow, goddess laxmi, own body, brothers and sisters are worshipped.
nepal sambat new year lies during tihar.
lhosar is celebrated in furwa's home.
wearing nice clothes, singing, dancing are carried out joyfully during lhosar.
they celebrate this festival as a new year.
good foods are eaten.
chhat festival is celebrated in ramdas's house.
taking bath near the bank of pond or a river is done during chhat.
worshiping the sun.
eid is celebrated in salim's house.
eid is a great festival of muslims.
fasting is done and offerings are given to poor people during eid.
christmas is celebrated at elisa’s house.
during this festival houses are beautifully decorated with lights and flowers.
nheumila, furwa, ramdas, elisa and salim invite to each other on their festivals.
they also attend friend’s festival and enjoy.
only few festivals are given above as an example.
several festivals are celebrated in different places.
students may know about these festivals.
give them chance to speak out the names, their different festivals and how they celebrate.
encourage them to participate in different festivals in their neighbourhood.
write the name of three festivals that we celebrate.
which festivals do you celebrate ?
which festivals do your neighbours celebrate ?
write them observing or asking.
what do you do in the festivals you celebrate ?
what sorts of food do you eat ?
complete the table given below.
choose one of the songs you sing in your festivals.
sing and dance with all of your friends.
184.
nepal sambat new year is celebrated in tihar.
alms are given to the poor in eid.
decoration of tree is done in christmas.
188.
sun is worshipped in chhat.
we celebrate a number of festivals through out the year.
good neighbours.
amu is a good neighbour.
he always goes to the village to see and ask about neignour's work.
today too he has gone to village.
on the way, he reached the school to find the roof of the school blown away by the wind.
he thought to repair it.
a little further he saw the water droping through the pipe on the road.
he thought himself to stop the wastage of water.
he wound up the broken pipe with the polythene which he had.
thus, the leakage was plugged.
then, he went to  mila’s house.
there was wedding ceremony of mila’s daughter.
the people around gathered there.
he told about all the things that he saw while coming by the road to the villagers.
they all decided to repair the roof and broken pipe of the school.
finally amu started helping in the wedding ceremony.
above mentioned activities are only some examples.
there may be some more problems of custom and condition in communities and public places.
encourage students to speak out themselves.
encourage students to find such good people and work together.
who is the good man in the lesson ?
what did mingma see and do ?
complete the table on the basis of the lesson.
who are the persons in your neighbourhood who help each other ?
write their name by asking your parents.
write the work of a good man doing for the welfare of others in your neighbourhood.
we should respect our neighbour who does good work.
one should construct the school alone.
we should give medicine to our neighbour when they are ill.
we should not cooperate in the wedding ceremony of neighbour’s.
we should live in good terms with our neighbours.
we should respect the person who does good work.
helpless and handicaps in school.
in our class, we have a friend with only one hand.
we all help him by keeping and taking out books, exercise books out of school bag.
we also help him.
rita studies in class one and has no parents.
the school provides her books and note books for free.
we also help her.
we do not understand how syanguli speak in school.
we make sense of his expression from lip reading and body gesture.
we have to teach him how to speak.
my another classmate nasala cannot walk with her one foot.
she needs help of others for walking.
we help and love her.
she is good at studies.
we learn more about disability what we do not know from her.
there may be other helpless and handicapped children in our society.
teach them by acting out how to help students in the school.
encourage students to develop positive thinking towards helpless and handicaps.
how do you go and return from your school ?
what sorts differently able friends are in your school ?
what kind of help do they need ?
show them in the table below as given in the examples.
what happened ?
what kind of help is needed ?
he broke his one leg by falling in his childhood.
he needs support while going and returning from school.
how do you help your friends if they fall and cannot walk ?
what kind of person do the following goods need for ?
we assist helpless and handicaps in school.
helpless and handicaps in neighbourhood.
laachi's uncle was handicapped since birth.
his left hand is shorter.
my uncle helps him when he requires to work with two hands.
latadaju of big house cannot see.
he cannot walk alone.
sometimes, he walks to the market with the help of the white stick.
his wife assists him and other family members also join her to help him.
helpless and handicaps are found in a village and a town too.
they are also human-be-ings like us.
they need others’ help.
to help the helpless people is our duty.
let students tell about helpless and handicaps of their neighbouring area.
by this they will develop an exploring habit.
describe different kinds of disabilities which students could not tell.
if there are helpless and handicapped in the classroom we should not say or perform other activities that hurt them.
they should be treated with respect.
find helpless and handicaps in your neighbour and write their name.
sketch the picture of a person with only one foot.
he is seventy years old person.
he has to be lead in crossing the road.
he does not have one hand.
he is a person who limps on one foot.
he is a person who cannot see.
my friend cannot hear.
what do you call the children without parents ?
the person who cannot see reads through braile script.
the deaf read through hand.
we support the helpless and handicaps in neighbourhood.
mutual help.
this is palistha's village.
in her neighbourhood, there are the houses of matina, lahana and nhuja.
they all live to-gether.
they work and celebrate their festivals together.
while celebrating festivals things that are in house are not enough.
they exchange goods in need necessity.
sajhya is in grade two.
he sits with his friends.
he asks for the materials which he does not have.
after use, he returns them to his friends.
everybody likes sajhya's good habit.
all praise her.
her friends also help others as sajhya does.
practise students for different activities to develop the concept of giving and taking goods from each other in need.
persuade students to help neighbours and relatives.
why are palistha’s neighbours good ?
what does sajhya do to the materials taken from his friends ?
how do you take help from others ?
at what works do you help your friends ?
one should return friends’ pen after use.
one should not give things to the neighbours.
one should help friends by lending goods they do not have.
the habit of giving and taking help from others is not good.
look the following picture and describe what they are doing.
we should give help and take help among familiar persons.
our common property.
there is a chautaro close to aju's home.
people sit on the chautaro.
there is a tap close to the chautaro.
there is a temple a bit up from the tap.
temple is old.
near the temple there is a small inn.
people collect at the inn.
there is a shop close to the inn.
people buy and sell goods at the inn.
aju also buys his required goods from there.
there is also a post-office near aju's house.
relatives and friends send letters through the post office.
a playground is  also there nearby his house.
aju plays with his friends in the ground.
the chautaro, taps, inn, post office, ground, health-post and schools etc. are the public places.
they property that belongs to all is known as common property.
we should all preserve our common properties for future purpose.
take students to observe the environment around the school to make them known about public properties and tell them to  prepare a list of public properties.
answer the following questions on the basis of the lesson.
how is the temple ?
what are there close to the aju’s house ?
what do people do through the post office ?
why do people go to health post ?
what public places are there near your house ?
write their names.
protection of public property.
tap, well, inn, schools, ground, pond, road, etc. are our public properties.
we should keep those places clean.
if the school's house collaspses then we will not be able to write and read.
thats why we have to keep care of long benches and desks of the school.
chautaro is also our common property.
people rest there.
people will not have place to rest in collapsed chautaro.
thats why we should all take care of existing chautaro.
bus and phone are also things that are required by all.
this is our common property.
tele-phone makes us easier to talk to people from far and near.
thats why we should not break, cut phone wires.
we should take care of it.
temples, monasteries, inn should also be conserved.
take students to observe the public places and practise activities to tell the names of the visited public places.
teach students the ways of preserving public places and property and encourage them to preserve.
answer the following questions.
write the name of public places.
how should we keep public places like taps, well and other water resources, clean ?
what should we do if the school is about to collapse ?
why should public chautaros be protected ?
how should the telephone be protected ?
how do you preserve the public properties of your community ?
look at the following pictures and write what is going on.
stand in a queue to drink water in school’s tap and report to your teacher that other students are in line or not.
we should protect and care for public property.
habit of waitting for turn.
matina’s house is in the mountain.
one day she went to temple with her father.
people were standing in a queue.
they also joined the queue.
at their turn, they worshipped and returned home.
nhuja's uncle teaches in a school in birgunj.
his father contacted uncline through phone to provide information.
there was a line of people for telephone.
his father also stood in the queue.
nhuja's father after talking with uncle over the phone in his turn came back.
there is only one tap in the village of tuisi.
villagers fetch water from the tap turn-wise.
tuisi was taking bath along with his mother there.
in the meantime, lumana came to fetch water.
lumana was in a hurry for some work.
thats why tuisi gave lumana turn first.
after lumana finished taking water he took bath.
inspire students to make a queue.
teach students to enter the class-room in line and go out turn-wise.
instruct students to stand in the queue in tap, telephone, bus, post office, temples etc.
why did matina visit the temple ?
how did matina and her uncle worship in the temple ?
how did his nhuja's father provide information to her uncle ?
what should you do if there is a crowd at the tap ?
why should we wait for turn in public places.
look at the following pictures and write what would you do if you were there ?
why one should stand in queue while taking public services like tap, temples, post office, etc.
ask and write.
our earth.
our living place.
nibha lives in town.
she lives in terai.
terai is plain land.
in plain none need to walk up and down.
it is easy to walk.
many people live in plain land.
chibha lives in a village.
chibha's village is in the mountain.
mountain is in high-land.
there is also low lands in the mountain.
the low land is called byasi.
the objective of this lesson is to give students information about the different places, where they live in.
have a discussion by giving different examples and telling them to observe the area nearby their residence.
where does tuisi live ?
where does chibha live, in town or in a village ?
where do you live ?
in village or in a town ?
what kind of place is called tar ?
what kinds of place are the houses located in the picture ?
where do you live in, town or village ?
tick off the right word.
draw a picture of your location to show it with your friend.
look at your friend’s picture to see how yours is different from his/her.
i can differentiate high-land, low-land, plain, khonch and tar.
our village and town.
this is the picture of village.
there is a forest close around.
the forest is densed as there are many trees in the forest.
there is a lake too in the middle of the village.
everyone has protected the forest.
villagers get grass, fire-wood and timber from the forest.
there is a river near the village.
river is big.
lumanti lives in a town.
there is a pond a bit far from the town.
the pond is small.
the pond was made by the people of the town.
there is a forest away from the town.
the forest is very sparse.
the forest was densed before.
the people of the town cut many trees down to make their houses.
so, now the forest has been sparsed.
this lesson tries to give the concept of natural resources like river, forest, pond, lake, mountain to the students.
that's why, make students familiar with natural resources by taking them to visit around their community.
near the village, there is a river.
near the town, there is a pond.
near the village, there is a forest.
far from the town, there is a forest.
kipa wrote about the resources around her village in this way.
what kind of natural resources do you see around your locality? write.
draw a picture of a tree.
i can describe the river, pond, lake, forest around my place.
our village in the map.
have you ever visited a higher place ?
have you ever observed its surroundings from higher place ?
how does it look to see here and there from a height ?
jujukaji came to his maternal uncle’s house with his mother in dashain.
her uncle's house lies in village.
one has to climb uphill.
while climbing the hills, his mother asked, jujukaji, where is our house ?
look.
jujukaji looked far off.
he saw his village at a distance.
jujukaji became happy.
aha! how beautiful it looks! jujukaji said.
when he looked from a height he saw his house like this.
since, the objective of the lesson is to give the concept to the students that from a low-land things of close-distance and from the high-altitude things of far-distance can be seen, make students visit different places and let them express about the places they have seen.
likewise make them draw the picture of the place they are living.
you too walk uphill.
look around.
what do you see ?
share your experiences with your friends in the classroom.
draw a map of the place you saw from the hill top and show it to your teacher.
from a low-land, things of close-distance are seen.
from high up, you can see things far off.
what is the difference to see from low-land and from height ?
fix your pencil in the ground.
watch it closely.
now keep a chair near the pencil.
stand on the chair.
look at the pencil fixed in the ground.
how does your pencil look like ?
i learnt to make maps of my place.
map of our place.
mila said, i live near likhutirtha.
my friend’s birthday.
lumanti and luja study in grade two.
they are friends.
lumanti always calls ramesh and goes to school together.
she called him today too.
luja's mother called lumanti up made her sit at the sofa and said wait a moment, lumanti.
luja's mother also sat beside lumanti.
lumanti wanted to asked one or two thing about luja.
lumanti asked her mother, when did luja born ?
where is luja's birth place ?
lumanti asked again.
then she answered, she was born in hauga ward of patan.
lumanti wrote down the details given by luja's mother in her notebook.
then upon arrival of luja both of them went to the school.
students need to be practised additional activities to gain information about their friends family background, profession.
luja asked her friends date and place of birth of her classmates and she wrote as follows.
you also write the dates of birth and birth places of your five friends as luja did in the table.
write dates of birth and birth place of your friends in your neighbourhood by asking them in the following table.
look at the calendar and mark the month and day of your birth.
we can write and say about our friends’ date of birth and birth place.
friend’s family then and now.
chhewang’s grand parents used to live in humla.
school and health post were far from their home before.
even the market was far.
there was no facility of roads.
the goods were carried by planes.
therefore, the goods were expensive.
now, there is a health post in that place.
there is school as well.
there is market as well.
it has been easy due to availability of helicopter.
they illuminate their house with the help of solar energy and cook their food with biogas.
chhewang’s brother teaches in a school.
his aunt works in the health post.
chhewang’s maternal uncle’s house is in nepalgunj.
now a days, he has been living in his maternal uncle's house.
nepalgung is a big city.
the road are wide here.
the shuttle rickshaws and carriages shuttle are seen along the road.
here is a ground for planes to land.
this ground is known as airport.
from here planes fly to different mountainous districts like humla, jumla.
let students collect information about their friend’s family’s background, pro-fession, religion, culture and tell them to read and have a discussion.
make them discuss and read what they have written.
clarify the meaning of solar energy and bio gas if they do not know.
chhewang  showed the place of  his neighbours then and now in the table.
you also make a chart to mention your neighbours’ living place then and now as chhewangs.
write about the family members of your friends in the following table as shown in the example.
i can tell my friend’s family’s living places then and now.
i can tell about their work, too.
our national symbols.
this is our national flag.
it has two red triangular shapes.
there is a symbol of the moon in the upper triangle.
the symbol of sun on the lower traingle.
the cow is our national ani-mal.
cow gives us milk.
the manure composed of its dung is useful for fields.
cow dung are used to wipe the floor of house.
red rhododendron is the national flower of our country.
it is found in the high hills and forests.
crimson is our national colour.
it is used for worshipping god in our country.
let students recognize the national symbols by giving examples and also tell them about their importance.
where is rhododendron found ?
what colour is crimson ?
what is the name of our national bird ?
where are lophophorus found in nepal?
write about the cow by looking or asking.
the cow has four legs.
write about our national flag.
draw a picture of our national flag and colour it.
i recognize the national flag, cow, lophophorous, rhododendron and crimson as our national symbols.
our economic activties.
respect for work.
mija is friendly with all his neighbours.
his neighbours are involved in different occupations.
one of the neighbour works in the field.
he grows vegetables and fruits in the field.
all the products that he grows in the field cannot be consumed.
he sells the products grown in the field and collects income.
ghansyham is another neighbour.
his main job is to sew shoes.
everyone likes the shoes sewed by him.
he has been collecting money by doing this work.
he is known to everyone now a days.
everyone appreciates his skill.
nagu's main job is to build houses.
every beautiful houses in the village is built by him.
he has earned good name and money from his profession.
timila, though, a child has the sense of importance of work done by different people.
she nicely respects the people who work.
she helps her neighbours in every way she can.
children should be given opportunity to observe different types of work of their neighbours.
they should be known that every work holds its own importance and there is no big or small work.
children should be inspired to help the neighbours in their work at their convenient time.
what are the works done by your neighbours ?
write the name of any three persons and mention what they do.
what happens if it is not done in that way ?
discuss with your friends and write.
what if the tailor does not stitch clothes ?
we will not have food to eat if the farmer does not grow crops.
the patients will not be cured if the doctor does not check patients.
where will we sit if the mason does not build house ?
what tools are required to these professionals ?
mason requires level.
teacher 	writes with chalk.
tailor requires needle thread.
businessman uses balance.
farmer uses plough.
carpenter uses hammer.
visit one of the working places.
observe the person and the way he is doing work.
what tools are required for that work ?
can you provide help for that work ?
no one is high or low on the basis of work.
we must help in others work in every aspect we can.
the proper use of things.
my name is naswa.
i study in grade two.
i take care of my  materials that i use.
i don't write nonsense in my copy and book, mess my writing.
i don't waste my ink.
i do not shout at my parents to buy unnecessary things.
i  spend  money to buy essential things only.
my name is arhat.
i study with naswa.
i learnt how to take care of my things from naswa.
now a days i use my things by taking proper take care of it.
i take care and clean my things of home and school.
i polish my shoes myself.
my parents are happy with my good habits.
the teachers and my friends are also happy.
we should teach students to care and use things properly without wasting it.
we should use and care things properly without wasting it as our children imitate us.
write the name of the things you use.
which works do you think are good and which things you think are not good ?
say true for true and false for false.
amu throws his clothes carelessly.
matina does not mess up her copies and books carelessly.
lunpaun forces his parents to buy expensive clothes.
kipa polishes her shoes herself.
write about your class mates and their bad habits that need to be quit.
what are bad habits ?
what ought to be done to improve bad habits ?
breaking pen by biting.
pen should be handled properly without biting.
foods should not be thrown.
we should care one’s things.
we should buy only necessary things with the money we have.
i take care of my things.
things made in village.
people of the village make mat, wicker basket by staying at their homes.
people of the village get to eat newer foods.
they do not need to eat any old foods.
foods like vegetables, fruits, maize, wheat grown in the field are being eaten.
foods like dhido, chapatti are eaten to get energy.
foods showcased at road sides are not bought and eaten.
they go to shop only to buy things that are very essential to them.
they wear cotton dresses that are easily available and made by themselves in the country itself.
practise students to eat the food produced in their village and use the things manufactured in their village.
what things are grown in your place ?
name them.
what are the things that you use at home are home made ?
what are bought from outside.
select and complete the table.
name of things.
manufactured where ?
write the meaning of the following words as given in the example.
write the names of any five your favourite things that are made at your place.
draw a picture of your favourite thing found in your house.
i eat foods made in my home.
i only use the things made locally as far as possible.
things made in town.
one day we decided to visit different factories and industries of the city from our school.
we, the students of class two, all went to visit it with our teacher.
we saw different factories and industries.
our teacher said, “write the name of goods that are produced in the industries and factories".
we visited different types of factories.
we also made a list of unkown things by asking with the workers of the industry.
the list is as follows.
what are made from from what ?
sugar is made from sugarcane.
jute bags are made from sunpat.
biscuit are made from wheat's flour.
soap are made from ritta.
paper is made from grass,hay.
clothes are made from cotton.
radipakhi is made from wool.
take students to small scale or cottage industries near by school for observation and tell them to make a list of products.
what kind of industries and factories have you seen ?
what type of raw materials are used to make those products ?
visit one of the industries near by and observe how goods are made over there.
write down in your note book what you saw and share it with your friends in the class.
write the names of ten things that are made at your home.
ask and understand which type of things are made where ?
draw a picture of your favourite thing.
i started using things made in my village understanding the fact that many goods are manufactured in factories.
practise to draw straight and curve lines.
you also practise to draw lines.
show the above pictures to the students and tell them to draw straight, upright, inclined, curve and different lines with the help of pestle, chalk, pencil etc.
it is interesting to draw pictures with a pestle, chalk, charcoal etc.
you also write.
i drew an elephant with a pencil.
draw pictures of your choice.
get students to observe different objects like pots, houses, flowers, animals, birds, fruits etc and encourage them to draw their pictures.
identify colours.
i like red colour.
and what colour you like ?
i like blue colour.
i love yellow colour.
by mixing yellow with blue i made green colour.
mix red colour with yellow colour and see.
try to mix colours.
mix blue colour with red colour and see.
draw pictures by using mixed colours.
get students to observe different objects and ask their colour.
practise students to mix colours.
let's play with colours.
i wet paper.
then i coloured it.
i drew lines with colour.
let's play with coloursi drew a picture on the paper.
i colour it.
aha! what a beautiful picture.
as shown above, make students colour on the wet cotton.
make students put paper on top of colour, rub wax on it then colour on it and carry out other activities like these.
let's draw pictures we like.
draw a picture you like and enjoy.
let students to see above pictures.
discuss with students about those pictures.
help students to select the subject of drawing and encourage them to draw.
let's print.
let's apply colour on our hand and print it on paper.
let's collect things for printing.
what does the print of the hand look  like ? have a look.
potato, onion, cover, leaf, raddish, okra etc can be used for print.
apply colour on the palm and fingers and make pictures.
what kind of designs can be made by the print of fingers.
let students imagine and print.
let them put colours on bangle, bottle’s cover, leaf, etc and take out the print.
make students wash their hands, print-materials and their classroom properly after completing the activities.
let's print a leaf.
apply colour on the leaf.
keep it on the paper, take out the print, and see it.
make design and print them out.
make a design of potato or in any other things, then apply colour and take out prints on paper.
let’s see what kinds of designs are printed.
make prints of different kinds of leaves, vegetables or other things, and then see them.
take out prints from different objects.
since by group’s effort, a better painting and creative arts can be made, let them work in the group.
completed painting should be displayed in the class-rooms and let students exchange their experiences of paintings.
let's make collage.
the picture which is made of colourful paper, photo, pictures and other things sticking them together, is called a collage.
pieces of paper can be stuck together with gum or sticky things to make a picture.
some collage pictures are shown below.
look and make one like that.
prepared collage by cutting thin colourful paper-pieces with scissors and sticking them on the thick paper.
manage necessary materials and practise students to make a collage-picture by cutting, arranging and sticking them.
let's make collage  by sticking colourful photos.
a collage can be made of cut-outs, fixing printed pictures, photos and other colourful objects.
in this collage, cutout pictures are stuck.
in this collage, colourful pieces of paper are stuck closely.
collect pictures and stick in a new from style.
bring colour paper and make a collage by sticking one piece of paper over another.
let's make collage from different things.
collage can be made by using many different types of things.
make collage by using different things on thick paper.
collect pieces of different things from outside the class to make collage.
use the collected things selecting in a best way.
make a collage in pair by discussing.
as shown above, make a collage from the materials collected by the students.
let's work with clay.
let us make different shapes from the clay.
clay pressed with fist.
clay pressed with finger.
see what sort of things have i made.
you also play by putting clay in your hand.
what different shapes did you find ?
discuss.
prepare students for clay-work, after selecting soil.
inspire students to make different things as shown in the above pictures.
discuss with the students about the models prepared by them.
manage to display their creative arts.
let's make different shapes from clay.
now, what should i make next ?
make different shapes playing with clay.
encourage students to make different shapes by providing soil.
make an inquiry on the prepared things by the students and manage for their display.
let's make favourite shapes and things.
make your favourite things.
encourage students to make an object by joining many shapes.
let students discuss about fruits, vegetables, birds, animals, etc, which either they have seen or eaten, and then tell them to make any one favorite object among those objects.
let's work with paper.
let us cut paper in square.
first, make square to the paper by cutting it.
fold the rectangular paper.
cut with scissors, and slowly unfold.
cut paper in square.
look and make.
draw like an eye of a fish.
cut paper in square shape and make a fish out of it.
tell students origamy is the art of making different shapes by folding paper.
let students make different shapes after cutting paper, like shown in the above pictures.
take precautions to avoid incidents that may be caused of scissors.
make butterfly and a crow by folding the paper.
let them collect old newspaper for oregamy.
cut paper.
fold from inside.
pull paper.
fold from backside.
fold once and open slowly.
fold the paper backside.
pointed cap.
duck.
paper star.
draw line with pencil and then cut.
paper fan.
apply glue here and join the paper.
make different objects like fan, rabbit, cap, star, etc with paper.
let students discuss their experience in creating the objects and make arrangements for the display of the made objects in class.
after this activity make students clean the class-room.
now draw eyes, mouth and beard like that of a dog.
now make eyes, mouth and stripes like that of a tiger.
then do the excercises as well.
music.
clap in rhythm.
i can clap in rhythm.
i practise clapping and pausing.
do practise for clap and no clap.
before teaching to sing a song, make students practise for clap and gap.
madal.
i play madal.
clap according to 1 (ghi) and 2 (naa).
in this way practise again and again.
make students practise clap and gap, repeatedly before playing madal.
let them rehearse with the sound of madal.
show the students playing madal by the teacher first, then let them practise simultenously playing madal.
sing the children song in tune.
understand the tuning of the song.
before making sing provide tune by clapping with hands.
give them knowledge about six musical division and eight musical division tunes.
in this way make them practise many times.
vocal practise.
i do vocal practise.
rising.
falling.
practise vocal tuning.
assuming the first white fret of madhya saptak of harmonium, let students rehearse rising and falling of vocal sound along with clapping.
in a clapping let them pronounce a vocal sound first, then in second step, pronunce two vocal sounds.
if harmonium is not available, make any key-note and make students to rehearse it.
tell students about theme of the song before singing it.
write a song in the board and make students practise it with rhythmic clapping.
for singing or teaching students to sing any song, take any local or any rhyme as a base for it.
practise imu and mari children's song in rhyme.
tell the theme of the song to the students before making them to sing it.
after that, write about the divided part of the song and let them rehearse giving clappings at the points of 1 2 3 and 4.
instruct them to sing a song in any local rhyme.
encourage to sing many other children’s songs like this.
movement of foot and soles.
i can move my foot with soles.
first of all keep students in a line and in an attentive position.
keep both hands on the waist, then fold the right foot slightly and rest on the sole and keep left foot straight.
in count one strike on the ground with the folded right foot and on count two strike on ground with the straight left foot.
in this way, repeat till the count of seven and on the count of eight let them come to the position of attention.
make them practise this on the rhythm of eight scale of madal.
i can turn left right with the movement of feet and soles.
practise to turn left right with movement of feet and soles.
do it standing on one place.
counting 1 to 8, students should move to right from their place and again counting 1 to 8 they should come back to their previous place.
let them come back in the position of attention on the counting of eight.
practise them alone or in group of students.
teach them as requrired by watching who is doing properly and who is not.
i turn backward forward moving my feet and soles.
the practise should be initiated from the right foot and sole moving forward upto the counting of eight, and again upto the counting of eight, come back to the previous position.
let students do it from the left foot and sole too.
let them do this exercise repeatedly individually or in group.
make them practise many times on the 8 scale beating of madal’s rhythm.
i can move towards left right moving my feet with the waist.
acting.
hand gestures.
make students do the practice of the gestures of hands given in the book of class one.
let them practise the hand-gestures stated by the words in the class-room song given in the class two.
express the meaning of the class-room song by the hand postures, giving the rhythm by backward-forward movements of feet.
i can imitate the sound of different birds and animals.
look understand and do.
show students sound of different animals and birds with acting.
thank you.
me and my family.
my name is anis.
i am now eight years old.
i am studying at grade three.
i joined the school at the age of 6.
i have grand parents in our family.
grandfather is sixty five years old.
grandmother is sixty.
they both are eldest at home.
they love us and tell us good stories and teach us household duties.
thats why we respect them.
i also have father and mother at home.
father is forty years old and mother is thirty five.
my father told me all these things.
before you begin this lesson, ask every student about their name, age, number  of members in the family and the age of family members.
get the response from all the students.
only after that, make the students read the lesson and you also repeat after them.
make the students do activities given at the lesson.
my sister is fourtee years old.
we are altogether six members in my family.
in our family, we are of different age groups.
some are small.
some are big.
we are all living together.
there are different age groups in anis’s home.
anis’s grandfather is sixty five years old.
anis’ grandmother is thirty five years old.
there are altogether six members at anis’s home.
how old are you ?
how many members are there in your family ?
how old are your parents ?
how old are your grand parents ?
how old are your brother and sister?
like anis, write about yourself and your family.
i can tell my age and the age of my family members.
help in family work.
our teacher came to teach us in the class.
the lesson was, help in family work.
teacher asked us one by one.
what are the sorts of works you do at home ?
kamala said, teacher ! i have a little brother at home.
he and i study and play together.
we put our books, copies and fold our clothes.
sometimes, we also clean the surrounding of our house by sweeping.
our parents are happy to see our work.
aha ! what a wonderful family kamala has, teacher said.
umesh said, i water my garden everyday.
then, i put water on the vegetable, plants of my kitchen-garden.
sometimes, i help sanumaya.
sanumaya is my friend and neighbour.
after listening to umesh, hari said, i help in putting foods to cow, buffalo, sheep.
i also feed them water.
i put “kuto”, “kodalo”, “doko” and “ namlo” in a place where it can be found easily.
i help my mother.
i buy things from the shop.
i like to do task assigned by my father and mother very much.
manju also described the work she does.
the teacher was quite happy to hear about all their jobs.
therefore she thanked all.
in the beginning, ask students about the works they do at home.
who do not have habits of working at home should be encouraged to help  in the household works.
praise and thank to those children who have habits of working at home.
the sorts of work done by kamala, her brother and hari are given in the table below.
write the rest of the work they did and also write the work you do.
works done by kamala and her brother.
works done by  hari.
works you do.
study and play together.
supply hay to cow, buffalo, sheep, and goat.
keep books, copies, and clothes properly.
umesh helped his parents in the following ways at his home.
by carrying rice, bitten rice to the farm.
by bringing water from the tap.
by doing work asked by the parents.
by taking care of my clothes.
by going to shops to buy things.
by helping to clean vegetables.
in which work do you also help to your parents at home ?
like umesh write in the table and show.
which sorts of following work matches to the work you do ?
help in neighbour’s work.
my name is devika.
my home is at pipaltar.
uma’s house is close to mine.
uma is my neighbour.
a person who lives near to our house is called a neighbour.
i help my neighbour.
yesterday, there was pooja at uma’s home.
i plucked and brought flowers for pooja.
uma also helps us.
i am mishri lal.
my village name is lakhanpur.
i have many friends in the neighbourhood.
jamuna is one of them.
yesterday, she got sick.
her father and i took her to hospital.
the doctor gave her medicine.
she got well.
i helped jamuna.
she also helped us by serving water to the people who came in the prorceeding during my sister's wedding.
buddhi ratna and sheel shova live in the city.
they live quite close to each other in the same ward.
one day, buddhi ratna's house caught fire.
sheel shova called the fire brigade.
shortly, the fire brigade arrived and put out the fire.
as a result, the other houses around did not caught fire.
this is how, sheel shova helped by calling the fire brigade.
how the children are helping their neighbours.
encourage them to help the people who live in their neighbourhood by asking them.
who did each work, complete the table below.
your friend has made the following table of work for helping the neighbour.
by serving water in the feast organized in the neighbourhood.
by informing the police in case of missing a friend of neighbourhood.
by obeying the elders’ orders in festival.
by bringing medicine when neighbours are sick.
by telephoning fire brigade in case of fire in the neighbourhood.
how would you help your neighbour ?
make a list the way your friend did.
copy out the correct statements in your copy.
we should help our neighbour as much as we can.
we should quarrel with our neighbour as much as we can.
we must be good to our neighbour even if he is not good.
even a small help does a great work.
we help our neighbour as as we can.
our traditions, social values and norms.
respect for the guest.
deepak was playing while his mother was inside the house.
mother! sister and brother-in-law have come.
hello sister ! namaskar.
hey brother-in-law ! namaskar.
god bless you boy.
where are the parents ?
they are inside.
please! come and be seated, brother-in-law.
namaskar, mother!
namaskar, son-in-law, when did you arrive ?
just arrived, mother.
matina entered the compound while they were talking.
who is at home ?
who are you looking for sister ?
brother! aren’t your parents at home ?
i could not recognize you.
i wonder what brought you here ?
i am a health volunteer.
i came here to ask if there are children below 5 years age in this house.
today is the day to feed vitamin a.
oh ! namaste volunteer sister ! please be seated for a moment.
there is none to feed vitamin a.
mailimaya’s, daughter next to our house, is still young.
she needs to be feeded vitamin a.
hello mailimaya ! please see outside.
the volunteer sister has come.
read and act out the dialogue given in your activities with your friends.
how should you speak with a visitor at your home ?
practise it from the help of your teacher.
always try to speak in the same way at your home, too.
what would you do if a stranger visits your house ?
discuss it in the class and write down.
hey! sister has come ! sister dhog.
uncle! please be seated for a moment.
i don’t know you brother.
so, be seated outside for a moment.
ask three senior people the following questions in your family and neighbourhood and write down their responses.
what should we do when a guest visits our home ?
write down the responses together at one place and present the report in the class.
for example, i asked my brother, uncle and father, “what should we do when a guest visits our home ?
he said, we should say namaskar to the guests when they visits our home.
we should behave nicely with our guest.
languages and costumes of my village.
today, aarati and her friends played a game of collecting pictures from the magazines.
in the same time, the teacher came.
he caught the picture of kumari and said, at indrajatra kumari wears such costume.
then, aarati said, “sir! i had also worn such costume in my ihi.
the teacher said, yes, aarati is a newar and speaks newari language.
the newars wear different kinds of costumes matching with the festivals.
in our village, different castes have different languages and different costumes.
now paste the pictures you have collected in a magazine and you have to hang them in your class ok.
to provide information about different costumes, different kinds of competition can be organized.
encourage the children of each and every caste to wear their traditional costumes.
as in the lesson, collect the pictures from the old magazines and books in your school or home related with the ornaments and dresses worn by different communities and display them in the class.
ask your parents and write what the people of your village wear in a particular festival.
which languages do the people in village speak write.
to which caste does the following costume and ornaments belong to ?
in our village people speaking different languages, wearing different dresses and ornaments live together in harmony.
festivals observed in my village.
to begin with, the teacher asked the students of class three to write about the festivals observed in their villages.
we enjoy holi in my village with joy and fun.
the next day of fagu purnima, people from around assemble and enjoy it by smearing colours.
people celebrate it by singing, dancing and eating tasty food.
we celebrate id in our village.
people fast for one whole month in this festival.
the festival is celebrated as a new year.
the last day of ramjan is called id-ul-fitr.
the day also marks the day to provide offerings to the poor.
in my area, during the full moon of baisakh, buddha jayanti festival is celebrated.
t is celebrated by offening prayer to lord buddha with a great pomp.
in this way, we wrote about the festivals that we observed in our village.
make children practise to see different festivals in the wall calendar.
encourage children to ensure the participation of one caste in another caste’s festivals.
you, like ram lal, also prepare a table of the festivals celebrated in your community.
look at the wall calendar and write down the festivals of any one month and mention the day of celebration.
which of the following festivals falls in which month ?
look at the calendar and find out.
let us celebrate our festivals together.
a good person of my village.
bhusan need to do the homework of soical studies book.
he asked his father, father; who are the people that help others in our village ?
his father said, there are several good people like that.
thats why, thammaya aunty of that village is very  good.
she keeps on helping everybody.
she works as a lead woman to repair and clean water taps, irrigation canals, temples and shades in the village.
bhusan said, father ! she is quite good.
could you take me to her.
father said, yes ofcourse, i will take you to her.
tomorrow morning when we go to thammaya aunty ask her whatever you want to ask.
bhusan showed the questionnaire form.
the questions prepared by him were like this.
bhusan’s questions to tham maya.
what do you do ?
what work have you done for all ?
what should i do to become a person like you?
children should be taught to recognize the good people of the community and should also teach them to respect such people.
students should be encouraged to take inspiration from the works of such people of village and town.
like bhusan, who are good people in your community ?
ask your parents and make a list of good works performed by them.
copy the above questions in your exercise book and ask these ones to good people in the village.
write the response in your copy and share it in the class.
write down which of the following are good manners ?
repairing the road.
destroying irrigation canal.
cleaning water tap and well.
throwing garbage on the road.
helping in cooking food in a big function like marriage ceremony.
this is how rama wrote down the following list of the works done by her parents for the welfare of other people.
making road.
making irrigation canal.
building chautara.
cleaning village.
building school.
building temple.
i respect good people by finding them in the village.
social problems and solutions.
help the disables.
i am basanti.
i am a blind lady.
everyone around helps me because of a white cane in my hand.
close your eyes for a while and see how difficult it is.
what a problem could have been to me.
thats why, i need your help.
if you see blind people with a white cane like me, please help them.
i am gopal.
i have had mental disease.
i am also a man like you.
i also have children like you.
i have been taking medicine.
recovery will make me like you.
i also feel hungry and cold.
when i lose sense, i cry, shout and wear clothes abnormally and in such cases treat me properly.
also, help other mentally sick people who are dumb, deaf and mentally retarded.
don’t laugh at them ok.
if there is a blind person in your community, ask him which work he finds easy and difficult and write them in the following table.
easy work.
difficult work.
listening to the radio.
walking.
even if there aren't blind people in your community, there may be other kind of physically challenged persons.
how would you help such people ?
go to an open space blind-folded and play a game as directed by the teacher.
what difficulties did you face while playing like that, write down in your note-book and present it to the class.
how would you help if you find a mentally retarded person ?
hand-over to the relatives.
how should we help mentally retarded people ?
what kind of persons need the following things ?
it is our duty to help physically and  mentally challenged people.
help the helpless.
watch the students how they behave with physically handicapped and helpless people when they meet them on the road or in the neighbourhood.
if they show good behaviour congratulate them.
if they behave badly, give them feedback and teach them required thing.
who are the people we should help to ?
the ways and means to save ourselves from being handicapped are given below.
write them down in big letters and display it in the class.
walk always on the footpth of the road.
while crossing the road, only use zebra-crossing and overhead bridge.
drop the habit of walking or running in a haste on the road.
don’t play or go to the landslide prone area.
don't cut trees adhockly.
don't lit fire adhockly.
when you are sick get your health checked in health-post or in hospital.
while on a narrow path, walk slowly to avaid a fall.
don’t play near a river and a pond.
read the following sentences and put them in the work which should be done and works which should not be done of the table.
to offer water to the sick.
to take grandfather to the rest room.
to laugh at the orphans.
to love physically challenged.
not to laugh at a dumb.
we help the helpless and handicapped.
abolish touchability and untouchability.
people of different castes live in the village of harimaya.
there are different caste like chhetri, brahmin, pariyar, losar, tharu, musahar, yadav, kayastha etc.
they have a practice that they don’t eat food of other’s touch.
one day, there came a big flood.
the big flood swept the whole village.
only the house of chhote lal musahar remained unaffected.
it also swept the land and house of moti prasad.
by caste, he was a brahmin.
there were no houses in the village except chhote lal’s.
therefore, they could not get a place to live and food to eat.
motiprasad was too hungry and thirsty.
when he could not resists hunger and thirst, he went to chhote lal’s house.
that day, he ate the food cooked by chhote lal deliciously.
he became very happy to see chhote lal’s helpful behavour.
after that, he started saying,  we should not say about touchability and untouchablilty.
all human beings are same.
people of different castes also live in the locality of man maya.
they have different customs.
however, there is no caste discrimination.
they have a practice of inviting people belonging to all castes to the wedding ceremony, bratabandha, or worshipping in their place.
all come to the feast.
there is a temple in the village.
they worship there.
the priest offers flower and tika to all people.
they all line up and take water from the public tap in the village.
all people take man maya’s village as a model village.
people of other villages also have learnt several things from man maya’s village.
thats why now a days the culture of touchability and untouchtablility is dissapearing.
why is a man sitting alone to eat his meal in the given picture ?
is it good to do so ?
how do you feel if someone says i don’t eat food of your touch, don’t come close, never step into my home.
is there a practice of rejecting the food of by others' touch in your place ?
copy the following sayings in the playcard.
eradicate untouchability.
all human beings are equal.
we all have the same blood colour.
untouchability is a social crime.
let us boycott socially who practices untouchability.
go round the village chanting the slogans written on the placard.
don’t carry superstition blind belief.
budani had a diarrhoea.
her elder sister called shaman.
he felt her the pulse and said, you are charmed by the ghost of the crossroad.
in the evening, we have to worship by offering chicken's eggs.
again he came at night to exercise his witch-craft.
budaniya did not recover.
budani’s mother took her to the health post.
giving her medicine, the doctor said, it was wise of you to bring her here in hospital.
no ghost exists in the world.
these are all lie.
we suffer from a disease due to the germs.
doctor showed germs difficult to see by bare eyes in budani's stool.
budani looked at the germs.
now, they do not believe in ghost.
if they had believed dhami, budani could have lose her life.
after recovery, budani has been going to school.
budani saw a man standing on the road.
he asked, brother, why are you standing ?
the man said, look ! child, a cat just crossed my way.
it is a bad omen.
i am delaying, wondering what to do, go or return.
budani said, crossing a way by an animal is not any thing of bad omen.
everyone has has a right to walk his/her way.
instead you may spoil your duty because you will get late.
in that case, it will really be a bad omen.
brother, come, don’t believe in such false rumors and go running after it.
what is superstition ?
make them discuss in a group in the class about blind belief that has been carrying in their village from early period.
binod is afraid of going out at night.
he was afraid because ghost might come outside.
one day, after his meal, he went out in the evening to wash his hands.
he saw something near the courtyard.
he was scared.
he started weeping saying ghost-ghost.
his sister rushed out.
binod showed to his sister.
in the beginning, his sister was also afraid.
it seemed as if the ghost is waving.
but she had read in the school that ghost is just a superstition.
so, she switched on and went close to see what it was.
actually, the flower plant was swaying due to wind.
both, binod and his sister went.
from that day binod stopped running after the superstitions.
to believe in something without knowing its reality is superstition.
mutual co-operation.
deepa studies in grade three.
it takes her half an hour to reach school from home.
one day, she was going to school.
the path was narrow.
she fell down there.
luckily, at the same time, other people were just behind her.
they helped deepa to get up.
shortly, they reached the fork path.
one was leading to deepa’s school and the path other down the village.
deepa said, i am too small.
my feets are paining.
thats why please help me in reaching school.
they said, sure, dear, we will take you there.
then after that they took deepa to the school.
deepa thanked them all.
due due her politeness deepa was helped even by the strangers.
make students develop a habit of mutual cooperation among family members, friends and other places.
even make students help unknown people by teaching them techniques of mutual cooperation.
what made deepa get help ?
how would you arrange help if you were deepa ?
you saw your social studies teacher wandering around your house one saturday.
what works would you do out of the following given works ?
write in sequence.
go in fornt of the teacher.
hide inside the house.
say namaste to him.
invite him to your house.
run away shy.
how would you introduce yourself to a stranger ?
write down what you will say once you meet  a stranger for the first time.
we should take help from and give help to  an unknown person if it is necessary.
good and nice behaviour.
suman studies in grade three.
he  lives at vijay chok village in nawalparasi district.
he is hardworking since the childhood.
he takes his brother and sister with him to school.
similarly, he also takes his juniors arround his surroundings with him to the school.
he respects his elders.
depending on the age of people, he calls them grandfather, grandmohter, uncle, brother, sister.
everyone appreciates him due to his good behaviour.
one day, he was going to school.
he met some people on the way.
they were strangers to him.
they had come to see suman’s school.
they did not know the way to the school.
they asked suman, what is the way to national primary school ?
suman said, i am a student of the same school.
please come along, i will take you to the school.
then they followed suman.
everyone were happy as suman helped them.
how does suman address a stranger ?
why do all people call him a good boy ?
how did suman help the strangers ?
how would you arrange others' help in case you lost your belongings while going to school ?
one day, bhusan and his father went to visit a market.
the market was crowded very much.
in the crowd he missed his father and the way.
bhusan does not know the way back home.
now, how would he find his way home ?
what would you do in your case ?
make a table like the one below.
write down the work that you did in a week and show it to the teacher.
share it in the class one by one.
we behave properly and nicely with all.
our natural resources.
urmila’s home is at madankundari.
this place is located in the south-east of kavrepalanchowk district.
there are many forests and rivers in her district.
consumer’s committee is there to protect the community forests there.
there is forest consumer’s committee, too in her village.
that forest consumer's committee is protecting the forest in the region.
thats why the small trees have grown big in that village.
since the big trees have grown no landfall has happened thereafter.
birds like peacock, bulbul, doves and animals like leopard, deer, tiger, hare, etc is being seen.
the people of urmila's village also happy due to the greenary of the village.
often the villagers get toghther to collect fire woods and grass.
they have planted orange, pine, koiralo, kutmiro, dushilo and ipil plants in the barren land.
urmila had also helped while planting those plants.
chauri river flowing downwards has troubled the people by causing land fall.
therefore, they constructed dams and planted trees to stop it.
thereafter the river have not caused land fall.
due to the efforts of all the villagers the forest is growing.
due to this they are very much benefited.
make students participate in the preservation work of natural resources of their surroundings.
make them develop a habit of keeping the sources of water clean, making aware of not plucking the buds of the plants and not scattering the dirty plastics.
answer the following questions.
what would you do to protect the forest close to your area ?
how did the locals of urmila's village control the land fall caused by chauri river ?
what minerals are found in your district ?
why should we preserve soil ?
some natural resources are given below, how can we preserve them ?
find out sources of water around your school or your house.
for what purposes, they are being used ?
discuss it among friends in the class.
we must preserve the natural resources of our country.
obey the civil rules.
dolma lives in mugu district.
she studies in grade three.
she went to visit kathmandu with her father during the winter vacation.
his father took her round several places of kathmandu.
his father took her round koteshwor, baneshwor, babarmahal, maitighar, singha durbar, golden tap, bhotahiti and ratna park.
she saw various signals on the way.
when they reached koteshwor, the vehicle which they were riding stopped at the pole near the street when it glew red.
she also saw zebra crossing in the middle of the wide road from one end to another end.
many people cross the road from zebra crossing in groups.
people are not crossing from middle of the road in other places.
she asked her father, father why here many people are crossing the road in haste.
her father said, listen! at the time when the red light is glowing in that tall pole, the driver should stop the vehicle.
one should wait when the yellow light is on and only when green light is on, vehicle should be driven.
when the red light is on people should cross the road and should only cross from the zebra crossing.
this is called zebra crossing.
there is another light placed towards where the people are moving.
there is a symbol of man placed in the light.
we should cross the road only when the light is green.
we should not go to the road when light is red.
they went to swayambhu next day.
they saw a long queue of devotees.
dolma and her father also joined it.
their turn came after a while.
they returned back after worshipping swayambhu and ajima.
dolma saw a notice on the wall while in a queue to take a visit of swambhu.
there was written, line up, worship swoyambhu and ajima and return back.
a signal of a white line in the road made for crossing the way is called zebra crossing.
a message giving information written on a thick cardboard and hanged is called playcard.
draw the following traffic signals in your notebook and follow them.
design pamphlets with the following slogans to present them in the class, “don’t litter the area”,  "drink boiled water only", “protect the public property”, “ plant trees to preserve the land fall and soil erosion”.
what type of rules should you follow while going to water spout ,fair and festivals in your village ?
make posters as given below.
make posters and playcards of rules to be obeyed by the students in the classroom.
put these playcards in the class-room, toilet, pathway and garden and apply them accordingly.
let us obey civic rules.
how are my wards and what are its functions ?
which are the wards you have lived ?
which places do you have to the east, west, north and south of your ward ?
make and show the map of your ward.
what are the facilities available in your ward ?
make a list of functions that a ward committee should do.
ask the names of the ward chairparson and members of your ward to your guardian end fill up the following table.
what works should you do for the development of your ward, discuss with your friends and write.
i can tell the boundary of the ward and the names of the ward members and can participate in the development work.
the place where i live.
kul bahadur’s house is in namdu village.
this village lies in the dolakha district.
there are lots of hills in the dolakha district.
since the kul bahadur's village is in the hilly region, there are both high and plain land.
pandu and tamakoshi rivers in liest in the east of his village.
the village has got a school, too.
a health post stands near the school.
gaurishankher himalaya lies in the sou side of his village.
a place with more himalayas is called himalyan region.
it is too cold in the himalyan region.
sanumaya lives in kathmandu.
kathmandu is the biggest city of nepal.
it is also the capital of our country.
kathmandu is one district of kathmandu valley.
this kathmandu is a valley.
the valley is a plain land surrounded by hills from all around.
santosh lives in dhangadhi.
dhangadi a big town of far western region.
it lies in the terai belt.
terai belt is a plain land.
bicycles, rickshaws and vehicles run along the road.
it is generally hot here.
the place where i live is a municipality.
the place where i live lies in hilly region.
the place where i live is neither hot nor cold.
while going to school i walk uphill.
what is the name of your rural municipality or municipality where live in ?
what kind of transport facilities are available there ?
in which zone does your district fall ?
make the map of the place where you live in.
i live in rural municipality or municipality.
my living place lies in the mountain, hill, terai, valley region.
my surroundings.
this is badri’s village.
badri lives at gokuleshwor village in darchula district.
the climate here is not so hot and not so cold.
it rains in  summer season.
people there grow potato, millet, corn, paddy and fruits.
some are involved in business.
it is surrounded by hills from all around.
they do a lot of singing and dancing.
people there especially celebrate gaura festival.
gita lives in bharatpur.
bharatpur lies in chitwan district.
it is flat place.
usually bharatpur is also very hot place.
it is warm in the winter season than in hills.
it rains a lot during the summer.
it rains less during winter.
bharatpur lies in the eastern part of municipality.
this forest is known as the tikauliya forest.
in the western part lies the narayani river.
narayanghat market is also here.
the transport facility is very good in bharatpur.
a lot of mustard and rice grows as it has fertile land.
people of different castes live here in the municipality.
some people are involved in business and others in service.
most of the people here follow hindu, buddhists religion.
like badri or gita, you also describe the place where you live in ?
i have been living in municipality.
in the eastern part of my municipality lies the forest.
in the west lies the river.
my village lies in municipality.
people of this place work in fields.
here people wear clothes according to the weather.
what is the name of the municipality you live ?
the ward number is 17.
recognize the picture and select the name from the list and write them.
i can give the introduction of my village.
an outline of the place where i live.
one day the students of national primary school of banke district went on an educational tour.
the teacher took them to the village where they lived on.
along with the teacher, they saw different things of their village with great pleasure.
they saw a health post there.
likewise they also saw a big play ground there.
a few roads looked bigger and wider.
they also saw a post office while roaming.
they found there was a police post to the east of the health post.
a little further, they was also a temple.
there was a forest in the northern side of the temple.
they saw several other things there.
the teacher assembled all the students in a place after the tour.
after that the teacher said, if we looked down at our village from an aeroplane, how would our village might look ?
rama said, it  would look pretty small, sir.
yes, if we look at some thing from height, it looks much smaller.
our village also looks smaller like this when we look at it from a high place.
take students in a tour of the villlage of municipilality and show them major places there and teach them to draw the map.
similary, also show them how it would like when we observe low land places from a height.
you also go on a tour with your teacher.
observe major places over there.
ask what you don't know from your teacher.
what are the things that you saw after your tour in the society ?
write sequentially.
draw the boundary of your surroundings of your village / municipality.
together with your class mates, practise to draw the map of the place you visited.
take help from your friends to draw the map.
go to an open space.
from there, look at a house near of and far of.
draw a map of your locality or ward to indicate major locations.
i can sketch a simple map of my village / town.
my name is bibek.
i live in biratnagar sub-metropolitan city.
this city lies in morang district.
this city also lies as the major city of nepal.
i live in ward no. 5.
some times back only, we went on educational tour with our teacher.
he took us round the major places of the metropolitan city.
we saw the place given in the following map.
take students to a tour of their society and show them main things and place and make them indicate in the map.
where do you live in a village or in a town ?
the places of your village or town should be visible in the map.
like bibek, draw the map of your village or town.
fill up the map with the major symbols.
as given below, draw a map of your surrounding.
i can fill up the major things of my village or town in a map.
our past.
my neighbours then and now.
tenzing, maternal uncle of aang chhiring, used to live in chokde village of nuwakot district.
now, he has come to live at trishuli bazaar.
lots of things has changed in today's tenzing and yesterday's tenzing.
now a days he has left eating grown in his garden.
he has been eating cooked foods found in market.
he only wears foreign style dresses like coat, jacket, pant.
however, aang chhiring does not like this habit of his maternal uncle.
he likes local foods.
he prefers local dresses.
his uncle used to like food such as potato, dried meat, dhindo.
he preferred dresses like docha, bakkhu, pangden made locally in his own country.
however clothes that is being worn in cold places is difficult to wear in hot places.
aang chhiring is a neighbour of sanu maya.
neighbours celebrate different kinds of festival.
aang chhiring’s family celebrate lhosar.
sanu maya’s family celebrate festivals like dashain and tihar.
in their neighbourhood, there are also families who celebrate festivals like holi, chhath, id, etc.
in aang chhiring’s neighbourhood, all the people participate while celebrating festivals.
they all live together.
make them understand good work done by seniors and engage them that shows work to be done today.
a dress worn by women of sherpa and tamang community having horizontal stripes is known as pangden.
a kind of shoes made of thick cloth and leather worn by the people of the himalayan region which covers up to the knee is known as docha.
a thick cloth worn by the sherpa caste of the himalayan region is known as bakhu.
like in sanu maya and aang chhiring’s area, what kind of festivals do you celebrate in yours, find out them and complete the following table.
what difference do you notice in dress patterns and food habits from past to present ?
ask your grand parents and complete the table below.
observe in and around your family about the dress worn by old and young people.
complete the following table by writing the name of dresses worn by them.
dress worn by old people.
dress worn by young people.
i can tell the changes seen in the living style of my neighbouhood.
my neighbour's before and now occupation.
janaki studies in grade three.
she lives at banjaria village of bara district.
in the past, his parents and neighbours were involved in different works.
they did farming, fishing, collecting fuel from forest, gardening, pot making etc.
with the income from these kinds of work, it was difficult to survive and pay for children's education.
janaki’s father and her neighbours started doing work which is different than previous.
janaki’s father quit the work of cutting down trees in forest and did work of electric fit out.
her neighbour mohan started work of cycle repairing.
similarly, raj narayan has opened a grocery.
rajia used to do fishing in river.
now, she has started fish farming in pond.
now their income has also increased.
as a result, their children janaki, ramesh, sohan and ramita are able to study in school.
they help their neighbours when they are sick.
collectively, they find the solution of the problem of neighbours.
now a days, they all are happily living their lives.
after finding out the past and the present occupations of yours as well as your friend’s parents, fill in the following table.
name of past occupation.
name of present occupation.
write down the benefits of the present occupation on the basis of the lesson.
after copying the following questions in your exercise book, answer it by asking with your next-door neighbour.
tell the answer you have written in the class.
what work did you do in the past ?
what work do you do at present ?
which of the previous or the present work do you like ?
write down the answer to the above questions in a proper order.
let's respect the occupation of our family and the neighbour.
lets help as much as we can.
our respectful heroes.
bal bhadra kunwar, amar singh thapa and bhakti thapa are brave sons of nepal.
they even shed their lifes by fighting with british to protect nepal and the lives of nepalese.
they bravely fought against the british in that era.
image of nepal and nepalese were raised.
bal bhadra kunwar proved his bravery in the battle of nalapani.
even women and children fought fiercely in that war.
amar singh thapa protected the western forts of nepal.
bhakti thapa fought bravely even at the age of 80 to save malau fort.
they were not tempted by offer of british.
they were able to show bravery due to love and affection they had for their country.
they are known as the brave sons of nepal.
organize activities through the media like story, song, acting to inspire with the sacrifice and contribution of our ancestors for the protection of national prestige.
maybe there are some people in your community who worked for collective good welfare of the village.
collect their name and work from your seniors or teachers and tell your friends in the class or write what you know about other fact.
person who contributed for village.
his contribution.
we should respect brave people.
let's love our country like they do.
lessons to be learned from the past.
dear friend gyani.
our teacher taught us about our past yesterday.
we learned many things of glory.
it is good that all knows about the things what we have learnerd.
that why i am wirting letter to you.
our country indeed has many good things.
we all should glorify the things to make nepal known to the rest of the world.
we should infact love our country.
our brave ancestors indeed have done many good things.
they even sacrificed their lives for the country.
we should have a sense of we and ours instead of me and mine.
we must not imitate bad things of others.
we should be happy of our own language, costume and culture.
we should also do go work for the country.
we shoud help as much as we can for upgrading of our country.
these are the things that were taught by our ancestors.
thats why for today this much.
i will write more next time.
your true friend.
organize activities to inspire them from the works of our ancestors which can make them responsible to the country and the society.
what can you do for your country ?
write down on the basis of this lesson.
you also write a letter to your friend with things you have learnt from the study of social studies and present it in the class.
write the following table in big letters to demonstrate it in the class.
women also can work as men.
to work for the betterment of the country is love towards it.
our economic activities.
importance of work.
munia’s house is in bhardah of saptari district.
his family's main work is farming.
her parents work in the field.
they eat grain, fruits and vegetables of their own field.
they also sell the surplus items in the market.
munia helps her parents.
pemba lives at chandanbari of rasuwa district.
there is a cheese factory in her house.
the milk of yak from the whole village is collected in the factory.
they make cheese from that milk.
the cheese made there is sold in and out of the country.
pemba’s neighbour, nima, carries the cheese to the market.
pemba helps his parents in their work.
sohan's home is in palpa.
his father guides the tourists.
his mother teaches in a local school.
the expenses of sohan’s family are arranged from the earning of his parents.
people of different communities do different work.
some people are involved in farming.
some people do business.
some people are involved in opening and running industries.
some people do jobs.
we should respect good work of all kinds.
work is the only big thing.
ask the children to ànd out different works done by the people of their community.
ask them to present what they have known and learnt in the class.
write five different sorts of work done by the people of your community.
sugarcane is essential for sugar factory.
a person who involved in farming is called a mason.
a businessman buys and sells goods.
we need labourers to make house.
fill in the blanks about the work you like.
good deeds done by the people of the community have equal importance.
less money more work.
my name is anuja.
i read in grade three.
in this tihar i along with my friends went in the new year festival to wish.
at night i went to play bhailo.
i joined friends to play bhailo in this year.
i got hundred rupees by playing bhailo.
i gave that money to my mother.
but, she did not take it, instead said,” daughter, better, go to the shop and buy things that you need”.
therefore, i made a list of the things i needed.
they list are pencil, exercise book, tooth paste, brush, ribbon, comb, hairpin and toys.
i went to the shop with the list of things and hundred rupees.
the shopkeeper gave me the things as the list and the bill, too.
i total money of the list in the bill was seventy rupees.
i handed him a hundred-rupee-note.
he returned me thirty rupees.
i came back home with the things and the remaining money.
when mother saw so many things and the remaining money she said,” well done daughter ! you are now capable of buying more things from less money.
even though you have money you should not buy anything.
i gave the remaining money to my mother to keep it safely.
i shared this all story with my friends, too.
tell a story that it is beneficial to be economic and harmful to be spend thrift.
you can also narrate the incident related with this subject matter.
then after involve them in activities which can help them develop a habit of being economical.
write the name of the things that you require for washing hands, legs, face and taking bath.
you have too little money.
so, you will not be able to buy all the things.
so, you only prepare a list of essential things only.
what should be done to correct the bad habits of the following people ?
monika buys whatever she finds in the market.
norki always demands money from her mother.
robin always demands new clothes from his father.
sirjana does not economize  tooth powder.
ram sharan does not even buy things he needs.
we should make a habit of buying only required items.
what do you think of anuja’s nature of shopping ?
which are things did anuja buy out of rs. 70 ?
why did anuja’s mother thank her ?
what will you do with little money you have ?
i spend only in needed things.
things made in our village.
lakhsari lives in santang village of dhankuta.
there is a big dhaka cloth cottage industry in her village.
dhaka cloth is produced and distributed by the industry.
some of the clothes made in the industry are worn by the the villagers.
some are sold in different parts of the country.
these clothes goes to the foreign countries too.
lakhsari wears dhaka shawl produced in her own village.
her father wears a dhaka cap made in the village.
her mother wears a dhaka blouse.
som bahadur’s house is at kuwapani of dhankuta.
in his village, there is a big tea garden.
there is also a tea factory.
several people in the village work in the tea garden and tea factory.
the tea of that place is very tasty.
most people of dhankuta drink that tea.
the tree produced here goes to in and out of the country.
like the people of village of lakhasari and som bahadur, we should also use local products.
if we do so, it will create job for many people of the village.
income will be generated nicely if there is job.
all the people of the village become rich.
when all become rich, the village becomes rich, too.
then every one will be happy.
make the students search and list down different things and food items produced in the local community.
as far as possbile organize activities which can inspire them to use such things.
write down the name of things produced in your community.
make a list of things available in your school.
find out where these things were made by looking or asking and make a table and write them down there.
description of things found in lakhsari’s house and the place where they have been made are given in the following table.
dhaka cap, blouse, shawl, coat of the village are made in the dhaka industry of the village.
tools used in farming are made by harka daju of the village.
dish, bucket, bowl, amkhara, kasaudi, pots are prepared in the city.
radio, television, watch are made in the foreign country.
you also find by looking or asking where the things used in your home are madeand tell where they are made and write them down in the table like above.
draw a picture of dhaka cap and put appropriate colors.
things made in your own place are cheap, strong and good.
things made in out city.
sundar’s ancestral home is in birgunj.
ranjana’s home is in butwal.
talk between the two friends are below here.
sundar! your home is in birgunj.
what things are found there ?
there is a sugar factory in birgunj.
textile industry is there.
soap is also produced here.
pots are also made there.
so, like these several things are made in birgunj.
frying pan of birgunj is quite famous.
do the locals of that place use things made there ?
yes, people use things made there.
they buy and use those things only that are not available there.
from where do the people over there bring food stuff ?
near birgunj city, there is sufficient arable land.
rice, pulses, vegetables, fruits, fish come from there to the city.
you also tell me about your butwal now.
there are many kinds of industries in butwal.
here goods like cloth, thread, biscuits, shoes, television, soap, etc are produced.
commodities produced here are also exported to foreign countries.
here the papulation is large.
farmers of that area grow food stuff enough for consumption.
i have to ask you many other questions also.
we will talk next time okay.
take any one soap with its wrapper that is used at your home.
look at the things that is written on the wrapper of the soap and write down about following points.
name of the soap.
place where it was made.
name of the industry or company.
whether there is sign on the soap wrapper or not ?
where are the things that are used at your friend's home made, write by looking or asking your friends.
most of the goods used in raman’s house are made outside the village.
they use good looking and expensive pots and pans though they have beautiful and durable pots and pans made in the village.
mats made in the village are cheap and beautiful.
however, they use expensive foreign carpets.
instead of eating fresh corn porridge, bread, rice and fruits, they eat stale canned food or food packed in the plastic bags.
now, what kind of suggestion would you like to give to raman’s family ?
write the suggestions and present in the class.
we should use goods made locally as much as possible.
visual arts.
draw the picture of different objects.
look, identify and draw.
i draw picture of objects around me.
you also draw pictures by looking at the objects in your surroundings.
let the students observe objects around the school or home such as table, chair, desk, book, exercise book, pencil, utensils, etc and encourage them to make pictures.
i draw a picture of a person i like.
i play football.
i can make these kind of pictures.
the picture of my face.
my dream.
draw the picture of person or an object you love.
let them draw pictures on different subjects like family, friend, and the person he likes.
while making them draw pictures, let the students select the topics by themselves.
only after discussion, let them make the picture of objects they selected.
make arrangement to exhibit their creations.
to colour.
let's play with colour.
i drew pictures with a pencil and crayon.
chicken’s brood.
i and nymph.
my friend who makes me laugh.
draw the picture of an object you like most and colour it.
look at the pictures, how have they been made ?
my country.
i am outside the home.
we went to shop.
can you all make picture like me ?
my dinosaur.
discuss and draw a picture on the subject using colour.
printing work can be done from different objects.
the process of generating a picture by pressing or applying color to a clean paper after placing it on top of the surface of an object which has been painted by one or more colour is known as printing.
get the print from any object.
put colour in the leaf.
place it on top of paper get a print.
now, collect different objects like thread, button, net, wool, etc.
put colour on different objects you collected by lining them on a piece of thick paper.
get the print by placing the paper on top of it.
we can cut thick paper as we like and can get the print by applying colour to it.
here is an example.
get the print from different kinds of leaves, frames and flowers.
cut potato or other vegetable.
make a figure on it and paint it with colour to get the print on the paper.
what types of figures are made ?
prints made from potatoes.
prints made from bitter gurd.
take different kinds of vegetables like potato, radish, lady’s finger, egg plant, etc and make figures on its surface by cutting it and then, take out the print.
make them printing after collecting different kinds of things such as thick paper, piece of wood, thread, cloth, colour, etc.
sit infront and look carefully rwhile doing activities of cutting figures on things.
make them do the activities under proper supervision as injuries can happen at the time of doing this sort of things.
collage can be made from by tearing or cutting colourful paper, cloth, leaf, other thin and light things.
collage made by tearing paper.
collage made from paper by cutting it.
collage made from broken bangles.
collect different colourful papers and bring it to class to make collage.
make collage with your friends.
what did you see in the market ?
make collage picture by remembering going to the market.
what do you want to play ?
make collage by remembering your favorite game.
we can make different colourful collage by cutting or tearing different colourful papers in different shapes.
we should properly arrange cut or teared paper of different shape.
look at the following collage.
how the shapes are arranged, discuss.
in collage, whole page can be covered with one kind of figure.
in this collage, small pieces of papers have been put together and the whole page has been covered.
tear the coloured paper of different shapes and stick them together on the page.
make different kinds of figures by cutting coloured paper and stick them properly.
make a collage which covers the whole page by putting together the small pieces.
make the students collect different kinds of papers and objects.
after the discussion on the example given above, let the students make collage picture on the subject matter which they can handle.
collage can also be made by sticking the rough objects such as grass, leaf, rope, sacks, etc.
such collage should be made on stiff and thick paper using glue or gum.
look at the collages given below.
which things were stuck to have the following pictures ?
as shown here, you also collect materials which can be sticked and make collage.
collage made from thick paper, leaves etc.
collage made from different clothes.
what kind of materials can be collected to make a collage ?
first, discuss and then, collect things.
put similar things at one place.
by using only four varieties of rough materials, make a collage with clear figure.
two students work in a group and make collage in a bit big paper which gives some information.
make them collect different materials and let them make collage pictures on different subject matters as shown above.
make arrangement to exhibit the collage pictures made by students.
take kneaded clay in your hand.
make a round shape by slowly turning it round and round your two hands.
different shapes can be formed by by making holes with fingers, pintching, pulling on the round shaped clay.
here, these kinds of examples are shown.
look recognize and make.
you can also make different objects from clay, make it.
divide the students in different groups of four or five students in each group and distribute equal amount of kneaded clay among the students.
let them take the piece of clay in their hands and let them turn it in round shapes or rounded structure.
after they make the clay round in shape, ask them to make different kinds of objects.
make design.
take the ready clay in required quantity.
put that clay on a flat board.
now, with your hand or round-shaped piece of wood make the clay a flat plate or slab.
after making the flat plate or slab, make your favourite figure or picture on the plate with a small stick.
making flat slab of clay by pressing.
a design made on the clay plate with a small stick.
figure made by adding clay on the clay plate.
cutting the plate of clay into figure.
after making a slab of clay, make your favourite design or figure.
distribute the ready made clay among the students to make them prepare slab and engage them in making design or figure of their choice.
make a hole on the upper part of the creation made by the students and hang it on the nail once it is completely dry and organize an exhibition.
make them colour the objects already made as per design.
paper work.
by folding or cutting papers, we can make different objects or shapes.
the art created by folding papers is called origami.
origami art was developed in japan.
this art is recognized as a traditional art of japan.
origami activity is usually made from square paper.
cut the paper in a square shape.
once you fold the paper and cut it as given in the following picture, you get a piece of square paper.
from the position of a fold the paper parallel to c and d as shown by the arrow.
now you also take a piece of paper, cut or tear it in a square shape and try to make different things.
bird.
fold the paper as shown in the picture and make a bird.
after making this much make an eye of the bird on that paper.
paper cup.
a box with four divisions.
tortoise.
first of all, the teacher should demonstrate how can they cut the paper in a square shape.
make them prepare origami arts by making them cut old or useless papers.
teach them about the following signs and make them work.
cutting the paper.
folding in the inner side.
pulling the paper.
folding from behind.
folding once and opening slowly.
turning the paper on the other side.
paper tree.
stick the triangular paper on one after and make a paper tree.
paper fan.
paper cut at one corner.
paper plane.
paper boat.
you also make a paper bird, bowl, rectangle box, tortoise, house, aeroplane, boat, tree, fan etc and play.
to make an aeroplane and a boat as shown above, let them use rectangular shaped rather than square shaped paper.
let them make one thing several times and organize exhibition for the prepared things.
have your ever played by collecting easity available things like clay, stick, cloth, feather ?
making things for playing is known as construction.
students not only at home but can also make different things at school.
you can play by making things and decorate the class room as well.
you also make different animals-birds or things from ball of clay, stick and leaves.
make your favourite toy from use of clay, stick, leaf, feather, etc.
make the students collect different kinds of things.
discuss about the examples given above and let them make things which they can make.
after making one, if time permits ask them to make another one as well.
paper toys.
you can make hand toys or other sorts of toys from paper.
shrijana has paper toy in her hand.
shrijana says story by holding paper toy in her hand.
you also make such hand toys.
make beautiful toys or things by using different things like paper, stick.
let them observe how the samples given above are constructed i.e. which materials have been used and how they have been joined and encourage them for construction work after discussion.
things made from paper.
several things can be made from thick paper.
here is a sample of a house.
this house was made by cutting, folding, twisting, joining the paper.
now think, how the window, roof and the door might have been made of this house.
paper has been twisted to make a flower.
try out once to make things of your choice.
make a house, a car or any animal by cutting paper boxes.
make things of your choice by cutting and joining thick paper.
divide students in different groups and make them collect different things.
ask them to work very carefully while using scissors or knives.
pay special attention to the originality of student doing construction work.
creations constructed by students should be brought under discussion and make arrangement to exhibit them.
practice this national anthem song again and again.
tell the students about national anthem song.
the teacher should sing and make them listen the national anthem song first and then make them practice accordingly.
before singing national anthem song, let them practice it by clapping or by using madal.
the teacher should listen the cassette of the class song before teaching.
first of all, tell them the gist of the poem.
practise the bol given above.
practise it repeatedly in own voice.
try to practise the bol by beating madal.
first of all, the teacher should demonstrate the beating of madal and in accordance with that the students either single or in a group should do the practice.
you can also write a story or poem and do acting.
repeat the activities of acting of class two.
encourage the students to play the role of different characters of lessons as well.
if students require teach them properly by sitting in front of them.
