paper cup.
hello sister ! namaskar.
one day, there came a big flood.
i change my dress after returning from the school.
his father said, there are several good people like that.
there is a symbol of the moon in the upper triangle.
let the students observe objects around the school or home such as table, chair, desk, book, exercise book, pencil, utensils, etc and encourage them to make pictures.
let students do it from the left foot and sole too.
sohan's home is in palpa.
we should infact love our country.
pay special attention to the originality of student doing construction work.
here the papulation is large.
he thought himself to stop the wastage of water.
near the village, there is a forest.
the forest was densed before.
i practise clapping and pausing.
cow gives us milk.
whether there is sign on the soap wrapper or not ?
i gave the remaining money to my mother to keep it safely.
we visited different types of factories.
photo.
things you gave to your friends.
temple is old.
you should also tell the names of other clothes and food items.
what should be said to them ?
make students develop a habit of mutual cooperation among family members, friends and other places.
she respects people who come to her house.
let us make different shapes from the clay.
we should also do go work for the country.
thats why, i need your help.
at what works do you help your friends ?
building chautara.
we should keep our clothes clean.
then make them keep things in the right place.
i.
different festivals are celebrated in our neighbourhood.
identify the place you live.
what do you say to your father’s mother ?
a signal of a white line in the road made for crossing the way is called zebra crossing.
tenzing, maternal uncle of aang chhiring, used to live in chokde village of nuwakot district.
me and my family.
how old are your brother and sister?
he felt her the pulse and said, you are charmed by the ghost of the crossroad.
i keep school's surrounding clean.
folding from behind.
my village name is lakhanpur.
paper tree.
we should care one’s things.
how should we keep public places like taps, well and other water resources, clean ?
visual arts.
things that i like.
so involve them in activities of doing their work them-selves and assisting others.
you also play by putting clay in your hand.
wearing nice clothes, singing, dancing are carried out joyfully during lhosar.
i help my mother.
bread.
in the past, his parents and neighbours were involved in different works.
tap.
she saw various signals on the way.
teach students the ways of preserving public places and property and encourage them to preserve.
buddhi ratna and sheel shova live in the city.
kul bahadur’s house is in namdu village.
my country.
what made deepa get help ?
our traditions, social values and norms.
i help my mother.
deepa said, i am too small.
my home is at asan street in kathmandu district.
cow gives milk.
taking care of things and saving them without wasting them is a good habit.
i use desk, bench, table, chair and blackboard carefully.
one should construct the school alone.
have you ever visited a higher place ?
organize activities to inspire them from the works of our ancestors which can make them responsible to the country and the society.
we are all living together.
there is also a tea factory.
i do vocal practise.
the forest is densed as there are many trees in the forest.
sichu is sitting outside today.
the head of my family.
distribute the ready made clay among the students to make them prepare slab and engage them in making design or figure of their choice.
bhusan’s questions to tham maya.
let them make one thing several times and organize exhibition for the prepared things.
how do your parents love you ?
now, what kind of suggestion would you like to give to raman’s family ?
lumanti wrote down the details given by luja's mother in her notebook.
thank you.
make students do the practice of the gestures of hands given in the book of class one.
i also live with father and mother.
i take care of things.
what to say to whom ?
show it by acting out.
my mother buys clothes for all family members.
draw a map of your locality or ward to indicate major locations.
if we do so, it will create job for many people of the village.
always try to speak in the same way at your home, too.
i put cover in book as it might get spoiled.
origami art was developed in japan.
they wear cotton dresses that are easily available and made by themselves in the country itself.
where does chibha live, in town or in a village ?
tortoise.
what public places are there near your house ?
chocolate.
which thing do you like most at your school ? write.
which colour do you like ?
like the people of village of lakhasari and som bahadur, we should also use local products.
hey! sister has come ! sister dhog.
to believe in something without knowing its reality is superstition.
there was wedding ceremony of mila’s daughter.
so, before starting the lesson, let them speak out.
recovery will make me like you.
keep books, copies, and clothes properly.
first of all, the teacher should demonstrate the beating of madal and in accordance with that the students either single or in a group should do the practice.
bharatpur lies in chitwan district.
you should tell students about the instructions because they cannot read them in their initial days.
there are altogether six members at anis’s home.
write five different sorts of work done by the people of your community.
milk and meat are obtained from these animals.
amar singh thapa protected the western forts of nepal.
the next day of fagu purnima, people from around assemble and enjoy it by smearing colours.
they returned back after worshipping swayambhu and ajima.
what is the name of our national bird ?
ask and write.
flute.
what do you see ?
there was written, line up, worship swoyambhu and ajima and return back.
pots are also made there.
they list are pencil, exercise book, tooth paste, brush, ribbon, comb, hairpin and toys.
it has been easy due to availability of helicopter.
breaking pen by biting.
then upon arrival of luja both of them went to the school.
my grandmother’s name is chini maya manandhar.
fold the rectangular paper.
help from uncle.
so, you will not be able to buy all the things.
you can play by making things and decorate the class room as well.
there were no houses in the village except chhote lal’s.
extra food should be thrown.
let's play with coloursi drew a picture on the paper.
printing work can be done from different objects.
chalk.
ms. ita has been eating products from her ground by making popcorn, grinding soyabean and baking bread.
all people take man maya’s village as a model village.
then, he went to  mila’s house.
there is a sugar factory in birgunj.
the tree is on the slope.
usually bharatpur is also very hot place.
finally amu started helping in the wedding ceremony.
make a design of potato or in any other things, then apply colour and take out prints on paper.
help from father.
in this collage, small pieces of papers have been put together and the whole page has been covered.
there is a blackboard used by teacher to teach inside the classroom.
several people in the village work in the tea garden and tea factory.
fix your pencil in the ground.
make them develop different things from mud.
as shown here, you also collect materials which can be sticked and make collage.
let's work with clay.
ask your friend nearby about his/her maternal uncle’s home and write.
my friend cannot hear.
where will we sit if the mason does not build house ?
jujukaji looked far off.
the milk of yak from the whole village is collected in the factory.
what things are found there ?
lumanti lives in a town.
we need labourers to make house.
brother! aren’t your parents at home ?
let's make collage from different things.
don’t play or go to the landslide prone area.
i also put water.
matina entered the compound while they were talking.
pemba’s neighbour, nima, carries the cheese to the market.
this place is located in the south-east of kavrepalanchowk district.
she got well.
his mother sows the seeds of maize in the field.
draw the picture of different objects.
draw a picture you like and enjoy.
my mother also buys necessary food required for home.
buying and providing books and copy.
from here planes fly to different mountainous districts like humla, jumla.
i will help disable people.
let us boycott socially who practices untouchability.
talk between the two friends are below here.
how many members are there in your family ?
in our family, we are of different age groups.
yesterday, she got sick.
you can also narrate the incident related with this subject matter.
as shown above, make a collage from the materials collected by the students.
what did you see in the market ?
here is a ground for planes to land.
chair.
mother’s elder brother is called uncle.
we must preserve the natural resources of our country.
we like fruits.
what kind of help do they need ?
what should be done to correct the bad habits of the following people ?
my home is in highland place.
he plays with the friends of his age.
my mother has two brothers.
practise imu and mari children's song in rhyme.
you also make a chart to mention your neighbours’ living place then and now as chhewangs.
what difference do you notice in dress patterns and food habits from past to present ?
then teach them to learn, study and sit together with their friends.
shed is in slope place.
they have a practice of inviting people belonging to all castes to the wedding ceremony, bratabandha, or worshipping in their place.
i will love my junior ones.
near birgunj city, there is sufficient arable land.
the symbol of sun on the lower traingle.
we assist helpless and handicaps in school.
there is a cheese factory in her house.
by going to shops to buy things.
go to an open space.
everyone appreciates his skill.
many people cross the road from zebra crossing in groups.
turning the paper on the other side.
make them discuss in a group in the class about blind belief that has been carrying in their village from early period.
keep it on the paper, take out the print, and see it.
making road.
don’t carry superstition blind belief.
read and act out the dialogue given in your activities with your friends.
they had come to see suman’s school.
now a days he has left eating grown in his garden.
there is a river near the village.
i will take care of my belongings myself.
she needs help of others for walking.
this is my school.
manage necessary materials and practise students to make a collage-picture by cutting, arranging and sticking them.
encourage the children of each and every caste to wear their traditional costumes.
my neighbours eat different sorts of food.
tell which things are made at your home.
destroying irrigation canal.
it is surrounded by hills from all around.
he was afraid because ghost might come outside.
we celebrate id in our village.
switching the light on.
i can tell my age and the age of my family members.
understand the tuning of the song.
you can draw picture by using  brick, stick etc.
like bibek, draw the map of your village or town.
how can you take care of the following things ?
showcase different things made by students in the classroom.
practise it repeatedly in own voice.
my wife's name is sangita sayami.
take students to observe the environment around the school to make them known about public properties and tell them to  prepare a list of public properties.
things made in out city.
paper fan.
but remember you must not humiliate students with disability in the class.
to take grandfather to the rest room.
our village and town.
the low land is called byasi.
father’s sister is called aunty.
nepal sambat new year lies during tihar.
there is also one square table used by teacher.
my mother works at home.
ranjana’s home is in butwal.
in this way, practise it many times.
people of different communities do different work.
what is the name of the municipality you live ?
which sort of games do you play with your friends ?
it is our duty to help physically and  mentally challenged people.
i clean inside and outside of the house.
now, how would he find his way home ?
to which caste does the following costume and ornaments belong to ?
soap is also produced here.
villagers fetch water from the tap turn-wise.
before teaching to sing a song, make students practise for clap and gap.
i do the work as they say.
t is celebrated by offening prayer to lord buddha with a great pomp.
budani’s mother took her to the health post.
don't lit fire adhockly.
make students draw different lines with the help of ruler.
encourage to sing many other children’s songs like this.
his father also stood in the queue.
the village has got a school, too.
one day she went to temple with her father.
my belongings.
he asked his father, father; who are the people that help others in our village ?
airport is a place where recently people have been buying land to build their houses.
like this, tell them to imitate sound and movements of other animals.
discuss about the objects made by students and encourage them to make more such objects.
tell, what are they doing in the given picture below.
i help my father at my home.
make a figure on it and paint it with colour to get the print on the paper.
identify colours.
draw the picture.
dolma saw a notice on the wall while in a queue to take a visit of swambhu.
this house was made by cutting, folding, twisting, joining the paper.
practise to turn left right with movement of feet and soles.
home.
the shopkeeper gave me the things as the list and the bill, too.
the cheese made there is sold in and out of the country.
in this collage, cutout pictures are stuck.
how would you help if you find a mentally retarded person ?
why should we wait for turn in public places.
write their name by asking your parents.
draw a line on the following numbers showing the way from your house to school.
which works do you think are good and which things you think are not good ?
look and make one like that.
her friends and teachers are also sitting outside.
say true for true and false for false.
run away shy.
my grandfather sits in the shop.
i along with my father and mother came to live at khusibun from sorhakhutte in nepal sambat 1123.
practise them alone or in group of students.
good morning, pranam.
in her neighbourhood, there are the houses of matina, lahana and nhuja.
what are the things that you saw after your tour in the society ?
he said, we should say namaskar to the guests when they visits our home.
ask the names of the ward chairparson and members of your ward to your guardian end fill up the following table.
recognize the picture and select the name from the list and write them.
janaki’s father quit the work of cutting down trees in forest and did work of electric fit out.
i can tell about their work, too.
take students in a tour of the villlage of municipilality and show them major places there and teach them to draw the map.
we must not imitate bad things of others.
the sorts of work done by kamala, her brother and hari are given in the table below.
together with your class mates, practise to draw the map of the place you visited.
yes, people use things made there.
aha! how beautiful it looks! jujukaji said.
make your favourite things.
what do you think of anuja’s nature of shopping ?
there is also a garden in front of my school.
help from aunt.
sun is worshipped in chhat.
i made an apple.
some are involved in business.
practise to draw the map of your classroom.
in plain none need to walk up and down.
they celebrate this festival as a new year.
jujukaji came to his maternal uncle’s house with his mother in dashain.
our economic activties.
we can write and say about our friends’ date of birth and birth place.
everybody calls her teacher.
i help others in household work.
i got hundred rupees by playing bhailo.
collage made from different clothes.
the pictures of loving younger ones are given in this lesson.
my friend’s home is in low land place.
what are the things that you use at home are home made ?
the expenses of sohan’s family are arranged from the earning of his parents.
my father, mother and sisters do different types of works at home.
i respect good people by finding them in the village.
don’t play near a river and a pond.
it rains a lot during the summer.
book.
it is a bad omen.
the objective of this lesson is to tell them about family members work and help them provide information about different kinds of occupation.
take help from your friends to draw the map.
suman said, i am a student of the same school.
myfather’s name is sanu babu sayami.
it is good that all knows about the things what we have learnerd.
norki always demands money from her mother.
draw like an eye of a fish.
make children practise to see different festivals in the wall calendar.
eid is a great festival of muslims.
write down the name of things produced in your community.
he has been eating cooked foods found in market.
differentiate between homemade and foods that are found outside home.
mix blue colour with red colour and see.
actually, the flower plant was swaying due to wind.
while climbing the hills, his mother asked, jujukaji, where is our house ?
i drew an elephant with a pencil.
how do you preserve the public properties of your community ?
i provide books for her.
i also feel hungry and cold.
our country indeed has many good things.
what types of foods are prepared at your home?
the man said, look ! child, a cat just crossed my way.
take help.
work performed in school.
rice, pulses, vegetables, fruits, fish come from there to the city.
sarangi.
which things are needed ?
help in neighbour’s work.
they saw several other things there.
the people of the town cut many trees down to make their houses.
teach them by acting out how to help students in the school.
we help our neighbour as as we can.
it seemed as if the ghost is waving.
tell the students about national anthem song.
festivals observed in my village.
red rhododendron is the national flower of our country.
i love yellow colour.
chhewang’s grand parents used to live in humla.
his neighbours are involved in different occupations.
discuss on different shapes formed while pasting.
instruct them to sing a song in any local rhyme.
they worship there.
there is only one tap in the village of tuisi.
aju also buys his required goods from there.
152.
tear the coloured paper of different shapes and stick them together on the page.
what are there close to the aju’s house ?
the road are wide here.
write the name of any three persons and mention what they do.
what kind of help is needed ?
she does her class work as per her teacher's instruction.
after that, i start to study.
i go to school.
one maternal aunt is there in maternal uncles's home.
he is my maternal uncle.
paper boat.
let them practise the hand-gestures stated by the words in the class-room song given in the class two.
draw a picture of a tree.
discuss with students about those pictures.
get students to observe different objects and ask their colour.
make proper shape of your favorite thing.
hello mailimaya ! please see outside.
work of family.
make different shapes playing with clay.
there may be some more problems of custom and condition in communities and public places.
mats made in the village are cheap and beautiful.
prepared collage by cutting thin colourful paper-pieces with scissors and sticking them on the thick paper.
building temple.
shopkeeper sits in a shop.
our festivals.
the outside houses were made of bricks.
chhat festival is celebrated in ramdas's house.
collage.
are the houses clustered or sparsed around you ?
organize activities through the media like story, song, acting to inspire with the sacrifice and contribution of our ancestors for the protection of national prestige.
since the big trees have grown no landfall has happened thereafter.
sometimes, he walks to the market with the help of the white stick.
acting.
after that the teacher said, if we looked down at our village from an aeroplane, how would our village might look ?
amu's school is in high land.
observe students' works at school and provide feedback if you find any weaknesses.
discuss and draw a picture on the subject using colour.
thats why there are still land left for cultivation.
how is the temple ?
all the products that he grows in the field cannot be consumed.
practice this national anthem song again and again.
his father uses hammer, thread, bell.
we.
encourage students to take home made food by asking different names of local food.
ask the children to ànd out different works done by the people of their community.
select and complete the table.
my neighbour's before and now occupation.
there is a forest close around.
what does the print of the hand look  like ? have a look.
what did your friends lend you and helped ?
what are the things at your home ?
after listening to umesh, hari said, i help in putting foods to cow, buffalo, sheep.
only after that, make the students read the lesson and you also repeat after them.
discuss with your friends and write.
pan.
motiprasad was too hungry and thirsty.
name of the soap.
my mother’s parental home is my mamaghar.
tele-phone makes us easier to talk to people from far and near.
it is necessary to teach students with more examples based on local customs.
everyone has protected the forest.
if there are helpless and handicapped in the classroom we should not say or perform other activities that hurt them.
make them collect different materials and let them make collage pictures on different subject matters as shown above.
rajia used to do fishing in river.
lakhsari lives in santang village of dhankuta.
while making them draw pictures, let the students select the topics by themselves.
other papers can also be used.
chicken’s brood.
make students wash their hands, print-materials and their classroom properly after completing the activities.
i can imitate the sound of different birds and animals.
they went to swayambhu next day.
i am studying at grade three.
people of different castes also live in the locality of man maya.
let them do this exercise repeatedly individually or in group.
the colour of the paper to be used should be different than the copy.
who are doing what in the pictures given above ?
is it good to do so ?
playground.
we saw different factories and industries.
bird.
she asked her father, father why here many people are crossing the road in haste.
the teacher said, yes, aarati is a newar and speaks newari language.
due to the efforts of all the villagers the forest is growing.
go round the village chanting the slogans written on the placard.
thats why the small trees have grown big in that village.
i provide broom, rubbing cloth and water when my brother is cleaning the room.
i like red colour.
madal.
draw a picture of dhaka cap and put appropriate colors.
practise students for different activities to develop the concept of giving and taking goods from each other in need.
in this way make them practise many times.
there is a lake too in the middle of the village.
lumana was in a hurry for some work.
he needs support while going and returning from school.
umesh said, i water my garden everyday.
mother’s younger brother is called uncle.
foods showcased at road sides are not bought and eaten.
you can make hand toys or other sorts of toys from paper.
you, like ram lal, also prepare a table of the festivals celebrated in your community.
write the name of five food items you eat.
how many rooms are there at your school ?
i take care of my things without wasting them.
however clothes that is being worn in cold places is difficult to wear in hot places.
he only wears foreign style dresses like coat, jacket, pant.
look at the calendar and mark the month and day of your birth.
he sells different kinds of clothes.
thats why please help me in reaching school.
draw any picture that you like.
one day, buddhi ratna's house caught fire.
luckily, at the same time, other people were just behind her.
what would you do in your case ?
by mixing yellow with blue i made green colour.
write the work of a good man doing for the welfare of others in your neighbourhood.
ask stduents to act out some roles that we show while helping needy people.
hey brother-in-law ! namaskar.
teach them how to take care of their personal belongings if they have not kept properly.
aang chhiring’s family celebrate lhosar.
in the western part lies the narayani river.
repeat the activities of acting of class two.
write down what you will say once you meet  a stranger for the first time.
name different sorts of work done at home and in school  in the following table.
radio.
i eat all home made food without wasting them.
ball.
which of the following festivals falls in which month ?
put colour on different objects you collected by lining them on a piece of thick paper.
do the locals of that place use things made there ?
i spend only in needed things.
that why i am wirting letter to you.
look at the pictures below and tell which is right and which is wrong.
clothes.
how should you speak with a visitor at your home ?
let us celebrate our festivals together.
mutual co-operation.
make them prepare dough to the students until they like.
our earth.
they do not need to eat any old foods.
civic sense.
what do you want to play ?
pieces of paper can be stuck together with gum or sticky things to make a picture.
sajhya is in grade two.
along with the teacher, they saw different things of their village with great pleasure.
she worships by sitting in the worshipping room.
first, make square to the paper by cutting it.
make a collage in pair by discussing.
practise it from the help of your teacher.
how is your dress up different from others ?
make them prepare origami arts by making them cut old or useless papers.
it is flat place.
how did suman help the strangers ?
what will you do with little money you have ?
collage is an art of making different shapes by cutting/tearing pieces of papers and pasting them on a paper.
they have also raised one cow.
madal.
i help my mother in the kitchen.
watch the students how they behave with physically handicapped and helpless people when they meet them on the road or in the neighbourhood.
who needs what ?
let them come back in the position of attention on the counting of eight.
mix red colour with yellow colour and see.
encourage them to help the people who live in their neighbourhood by asking them.
this forest is known as the tikauliya forest.
how do you help your friends if they fall and cannot walk ?
you also make a paper bird, bowl, rectangle box, tortoise, house, aeroplane, boat, tree, fan etc and play.
make different kinds of figures by cutting coloured paper and stick them properly.
look at the collages given below.
tuisi was taking bath along with his mother there.
sirjana does not economize  tooth powder.
our natural resources.
collect pictures and stick in a new from style.
our national symbols.
the forest is very sparse.
image of nepal and nepalese were raised.
then make them prepare soft dough.
divide the students in different groups of four or five students in each group and distribute equal amount of kneaded clay among the students.
which festivals do you celebrate ?
my name is devika.
bhajuman’s father is a mason.
i take other's help.
she needs to be feeded vitamin a.
the doctor gave her medicine.
books should not be covered.
create other shapes by joining different shapes made by students and show them.
during this festival houses are beautifully decorated with lights and flowers.
while crossing the road, only use zebra-crossing and overhead bridge.
she puts cover on her books.
paper has been twisted to make a flower.
we should give medicine to our neighbour when they are ill.
her friends also help others as sajhya does.
birds like peacock, bulbul, doves and animals like leopard, deer, tiger, hare, etc is being seen.
i will eat snack.
write them down in big letters and display it in the class.
brother, come, don’t believe in such false rumors and go running after it.
write the names of any five your favourite things that are made at your place.
i help my father at office work.
let the students tell their family members’ occupation and practise various activities to make familiar with different professions.
even though you have money you should not buy anything.
you also tell me about your butwal now.
what are the things at your home ?
making flat slab of clay by pressing.
i take milk from my tamed cow.
let's make collage  by sticking colourful photos.
there is a big dhaka cloth cottage industry in her village.
we suffer from a disease due to the germs.
santosh lives in dhangadhi.
yechu's father works in the office.
look at the following works and in which work do you need help ?
yesterday, there was pooja at uma’s home.
finally, make them do the given exercises.
help in family work.
matina does not mess up her copies and books carelessly.
complete the table given below.
look at the calendar and find out.
who is the good man in the lesson ?
name them.
where do you throw wastes that you find around your school ?
i wet paper.
which of the previous or the present work do you like ?
he returned me thirty rupees.
look recognize and make.
show the above pictures to the students and ask them different questions about activities and make discussion.
the cow has four legs.
thats why we should all take care of existing chautaro.
let them put colours on bangle, bottle’s cover, leaf, etc and take out the print.
who is helping what in the given pictures ?
give them knowledge about six musical division and eight musical division tunes.
it is found in the high hills and forests.
her school and home are nearby not far.
encourage students to develop positive thinking towards helpless and handicaps.
all praise her.
to make an aeroplane and a boat as shown above, let them use rectangular shaped rather than square shaped paper.
they even shed their lifes by fighting with british to protect nepal and the lives of nepalese.
what help do you do to others at home ?
the teacher took them to the village where they lived on.
help needy ones.
ask them to work very carefully while using scissors or knives.
the person who works in the field is called farmer.
in the west lies the river.
father’s mother should be called grandmother.
make collage with your friends.
my maternal uncle's home.
every one says me nice, good child.
i handed him a hundred-rupee-note.
how did matina and her uncle worship in the temple ?
my mother teaches at school.
works done by kamala and her brother.
tungana.
kathmandu is one district of kathmandu valley.
counting 1 to 8, students should move to right from their place and again counting 1 to 8 they should come back to their previous place.
i read in grade three.
that day, he ate the food cooked by chhote lal deliciously.
in the same time, the teacher came.
in which works do your parents help you ?
try to draw a picture of your school like sichu have drawn.
maybe there are some people in your community who worked for collective good welfare of the village.
i don’t know you brother.
copy the following sayings in the playcard.
what kinds of place are the houses located in the picture ?
there is none to feed vitamin a.
make beautiful toys or things by using different things like paper, stick.
you can also make different objects from clay, make it.
land around the home.
who does what at your home ?
some collage pictures are shown below.
there is another light placed towards where the people are moving.
some natural resources are given below, how can we preserve them ?
they do a lot of singing and dancing.
write the name of the things that you require for washing hands, legs, face and taking bath.
the teacher was quite happy to hear about all their jobs.
kipa wrote about the resources around her village in this way.
write about our national flag.
i  spend  money to buy essential things only.
if they had believed dhami, budani could have lose her life.
sichu is studying at grade one.
temple.
ask what you don't know from your teacher.
sing the children song in tune.
giving her medicine, the doctor said, it was wise of you to bring her here in hospital.
ask and understand which type of things are made where ?
one should wait when the yellow light is on and only when green light is on, vehicle should be driven.
my name is palpasa kasa.
my neighbours do different types of works.
let students collect information about their friend’s family’s background, pro-fession, religion, culture and tell them to read and have a discussion.
big.
get the print from different kinds of leaves, frames and flowers.
i study in grade two.
what should we do if the school is about to collapse ?
this village lies in the dolakha district.
pulling the paper.
write the greetings used in your family and neighbourhood as given below.
give some more examples of different works of neighbourhood and make students discuss about them accordingly.
what works you can do and works you cannot ?
other papers can also be used instead of papers required to read by students.
person who contributed for village.
what are made from from what ?
sometimes i help my mother by sorting out vegetables.
first of all, tell them the gist of the poem.
make them to sketch zigzag lines with fingers/small thin sticks on sand, flour, ground, etc.
respect for work.
use the collected things selecting in a best way.
this is also a big ground near her home.
one should return friends’ pen after use.
i only use the things made locally as far as possible.
when the red light is on people should cross the road and should only cross from the zebra crossing.
when mother saw so many things and the remaining money she said,” well done daughter ! you are now capable of buying more things from less money.
draw a picture and show your teacher.
there is a chautaro close to aju's home.
to help the helpless people is our duty.
present a chart of three generations of your own in the class and make your students prepare a chart which contains three generations like yours.
when he looked from a height he saw his house like this.
draw the pictures of two things that your family-members use.
look at the following pictures and write what would you do if you were there ?
our past.
tick the things that are at your home.
try to mix colours.
hand-over to the relatives.
my another classmate nasala cannot walk with her one foot.
apply colour on the palm and fingers and make pictures.
identify your clothes.
persuade students to help neighbours and relatives.
thats why now a days the culture of touchability and untouchtablility is dissapearing.
good foods are eaten.
collage made from thick paper, leaves etc.
depending on the age of people, he calls them grandfather, grandmohter, uncle, brother, sister.
the outside houses were big.
now, she has started fish farming in pond.
cleaning village.
name of present occupation.
my house is in low land.
i can move towards left right moving my feet with the waist.
i bring worshipping things for my grandfather.
things made in our village.
biscuit are made from wheat's flour.
this is my house.
my friend’s birthday.
people are not crossing from middle of the road in other places.
i live in ward no. 5.
damphu.
hasana's house is on high land.
pick up and put the dirty things and a piece of paper of your classroom in the proper place.
the picture which is made of colourful paper, photo, pictures and other things sticking them together, is called a collage.
sundar’s ancestral home is in birgunj.
therefore, i made a list of the things i needed.
put aside the mud block.
i take care of my things.
music.
social problem solutions.
give them sticks so that they can practise of making house or school.
what difficulties did you face while playing like that, write down in your note-book and present it to the class.
don’t laugh at them ok.
hariman's father and mother are also farmers.
fill in the blanks about the work you like.
tick off the right word.
how do you love your juniors ?
i keep my clothes and shoes at proper place.
i was born at 9’o clock on suday.
shortly, the fire brigade arrived and put out the fire.
she works as a lead woman to repair and clean water taps, irrigation canals, temples and shades in the village.
how are my wards and what are its functions ?
everybody is looking around the school.
my ancestors.
how do you go and return from your school ?
how does it look to see here and there from a height ?
we should help our neighbour as much as we can.
so, you only prepare a list of essential things only.
similarly, raj narayan has opened a grocery.
what colour is crimson ?
for singing or teaching students to sing any song, take any local or any rhyme as a base for it.
this is how palpasa completed the table about his neighbour’s food.
from a low-land, things of close-distance are seen.
you also find by looking or asking where the things used in your home are madeand tell where they are made and write them down in the table like above.
write the name of the things that your family-members use.
choose one of the songs you sing in your festivals.
my school is in low land.
people there grow potato, millet, corn, paddy and fruits.
lets help as much as we can.
the volunteer sister has come.
what are bought from outside.
what types of figures are made ?
the cow is our national ani-mal.
which pictures match to the work done by your head of family ?
bhajuman’s father constructs houses.
yes, if we look at some thing from height, it looks much smaller.
i am mishri lal.
even a small help does a great work.
however, they use expensive foreign carpets.
the transport facility is very good in bharatpur.
amu's school is in hill and palpasaya's school is in plain.
maternal uncle and aunt both love me very much.
look the following picture and describe what they are doing.
they also sell the surplus items in the market.
the place where i live lies in hilly region.
we should protect and care for public property.
ask them to name musical instruments according to number and identify the musical instruments.
after saturday sunday comes.
my aunt knitted a bag for me for carrying books.
write dates of birth and birth place of your friends in your neighbourhood by asking them in the following table.
blackboard.
encourage children to ensure the participation of one caste in another caste’s festivals.
there was a line of people for telephone.
in the crowd he missed his father and the way.
share it in the class one by one.
i can clap in rhythm.
he loves the youngers.
how would you help such people ?
their turn came after a while.
throwing garbage on the road.
they have planted orange, pine, koiralo, kutmiro, dushilo and ipil plants in the barren land.
he likes local foods.
i am a blind lady.
observe the person and the way he is doing work.
he is known to everyone now a days.
amu's school is little bit far away from her home.
gita lives in bharatpur.
what sort of clothes do your neighbours wear ?
how would you arrange others' help in case you lost your belongings while going to school ?
write the meaning of the following words as given in the example.
she cares for her toys.
i and nymph.
we are altogether six members in my family.
the ground is plain.
what do you call the children without parents ?
look around.
i will help needy people.
foods should not be thrown.
every beautiful houses in the village is built by him.
look, take care your personal belongings in a way it can be.
teach them about the following signs and make them work.
i have been taking medicine.
what did you draw the figure of the house with ?
188.
help from mother.
so, like these several things are made in birgunj.
the process of generating a picture by pressing or applying color to a clean paper after placing it on top of the surface of an object which has been painted by one or more colour is known as printing.
maize, soyabean and wheat grows in that land.
she keeps her clothes neat and clean.
i help my sister.
bring colour paper and make a collage by sticking one piece of paper over another.
students need to be practised additional activities to gain information about their friends family background, profession.
write down in your note book what you saw and share it with your friends in the class.
i draw picture of objects around me.
aja’s home is in plain.
we should not go to the road when light is red.
we support the helpless and handicaps in neighbourhood.
i borrow rice from neighbour.
they saw a health post there.
these are the things that were taught by our ancestors.
make a collage which covers the whole page by putting together the small pieces.
uncle! please be seated for a moment.
our neighbours buy other food supplies from the market.
paper fan.
dolma and her father also joined it.
ask them to visit their own school and make them practise to draw simple maps of their school.
many people live in plain land.
the pond is small.
i put “kuto”, “kodalo”, “doko” and “ namlo” in a place where it can be found easily.
a little further, they was also a temple.
things made in your own place are cheap, strong and good.
we like animals.
watch it closely.
she asks the reason with people for visiting her home.
students may know about these festivals.
my dinosaur.
what should you do to live together with your friends.
one day, bhusan and his father went to visit a market.
instruct students to stand in the queue in tap, telephone, bus, post office, temples etc.
what tools are required to these professionals ?
mountain is in high-land.
first of all, the teacher should demonstrate how can they cut the paper in a square shape.
in which work do you also help to your parents at home ?
therefore she thanked all.
teacher asked us one by one.
by informing the police in case of missing a friend of neighbourhood.
before making sing provide tune by clapping with hands.
everyone around helps me because of a white cane in my hand.
matina’s house is in the mountain.
dolma lives in mugu district.
a businessman buys and sells goods.
two students work in a group and make collage in a bit big paper which gives some information.
there are different caste like chhetri, brahmin, pariyar, losar, tharu, musahar, yadav, kayastha etc.
after use, he returns them to his friends.
before you begin this lesson, ask every student about their name, age, number  of members in the family and the age of family members.
aha! what a beautiful picture.
complete the following table about yourself and tell your friends.
we should respect brave people.
make collage by using different things on thick paper.
our teacher said, “write the name of goods that are produced in the industries and factories".
we should teach students to care and use things properly without wasting it.
hariman's family members work together in the field.
the places of your village or town should be visible in the map.
how should the telephone be protected ?
to offer water to the sick.
narayanghat market is also here.
you also draw pictures by looking at the objects in your surroundings.
deepak was playing while his mother was inside the house.
what should we do when a guest visits our home ?
where do you live in a village or in a town ?
dashain, tihar, teej are celebrated in nhiumila's house.
again he came at night to exercise his witch-craft.
respect to neighbours.
what should you do if there is a crowd at the tap ?
origami activity is usually made from square paper.
manufactured where ?
sichu is sitting separately and drawing a map of school by looking at it today.
tick for the right one and cross for the wrong ones.
i also keep my classroom clean.
we should buy only necessary things with the money we have.
you also go on a tour with your teacher.
my neighbours then and now.
also, make them say the number of family members.
lumanti wanted to asked one or two thing about luja.
i take care of my  materials that i use.
carpenter uses hammer.
say that ready-made foods of the market are not healthy and ask them to avoid them as far as possible.
by carrying rice, bitten rice to the farm.
it takes her half an hour to reach school from home.
in field paddy grows.
difficult work.
write down the responses together at one place and present the report in the class.
when all become rich, the village becomes rich, too.
easy work.
make them practise this on the rhythm of eight scale of madal.
i will help others.
listening to the radio.
by doing work asked by the parents.
discuss it among friends in the class.
take the ready clay in required quantity.
how should we help mentally retarded people ?
abolish touchability and untouchability.
i can tell about the work that my family-members do.
look and talk about the pictures.
what did mingma see and do ?
loaf.
who did each work, complete the table below.
they saw a long queue of devotees.
garden.
they help their neighbours when they are sick.
why did anuja’s mother thank her ?
she helps her neighbours in every way she can.
then i coloured it.
there are many kinds of industries in butwal.
keep both hands on the waist, then fold the right foot slightly and rest on the sole and keep left foot straight.
his contribution.
make students tell different works that are performed in their family while teaching this lesson.
tomorrow morning when we go to thammaya aunty ask her whatever you want to ask.
she also has good connection with her neighbours.
as shown above, make students colour on the wet cotton.
tell the answer you have written in the class.
make a list of things available in your school.
what do you do after going to school ?
to laugh at the orphans.
matina is now seven years old.
people of the village get to eat newer foods.
nhuja's uncle teaches in a school in birgunj.
today is the day to feed vitamin a.
look and make.
teaching instructions.
buying and bringing clothes.
aaha ! how good is matina’s habit.
near the town, there is a pond.
kathmandu is the biggest city of nepal.
what kind of person do the following goods need for ?
so, be seated outside for a moment.
mija is friendly with all his neighbours.
eradicate untouchability.
now their income has also increased.
she also helped us by serving water to the people who came in the prorceeding during my sister's wedding.
make them practise hand gestures as given in the above picture.
discuss about the examples given above and let them make things which they can make.
they all live to-gether.
map of school.
they also saw a post office while roaming.
what did you make ?
we should quarrel with our neighbour as much as we can.
lunpaun forces his parents to buy expensive clothes.
she keeps food covered.
i sit with my friends in the school.
pandu and tamakoshi rivers in liest in the east of his village.
put colour in the leaf.
we help the helpless and handicapped.
make them develop a habit of keeping the sources of water clean, making aware of not plucking the buds of the plants and not scattering the dirty plastics.
a design made on the clay plate with a small stick.
make them understand good work done by seniors and engage them that shows work to be done today.
even make students help unknown people by teaching them techniques of mutual cooperation.
members of my family wear different types of clothes.
more.
let students to see above pictures.
since the aim of this lesson is to teach students different habits like using and caring their things, teach them by conduction of discussion and role play on the methods of using things properly and keep safely.
stand in a queue to drink water in school’s tap and report to your teacher that other students are in line or not.
let us obey civic rules.
chibha's village is in the mountain.
we should have a sense of we and ours instead of me and mine.
write the suggestions and present in the class.
do practise for clap and no clap.
sichu sketched the map of home with a pencil and she thought how her home is.
things of school.
father said, yes ofcourse, i will take you to her.
binod is afraid of going out at night.
how old are you ?
i shared this all story with my friends, too.
folding in the inner side.
in this way practise again and again.
write the rest of the work they did and also write the work you do.
they have raised cows, buffaloes, goats, pigs.
prints made from bitter gurd.
i use my toothbrush properly while brushing teeth.
we do not understand how syanguli speak in school.
name of the industry or company.
write the names of ten things that are made at your home.
vocal practise.
there is also one rack to keep student's.
therefore, the goods were expensive.
what is there in front of your school ?
thal.
importance of work.
repairing the road.
even the market was far.
make design.
collect different colourful papers and bring it to class to make collage.
when he could not resists hunger and thirst, he went to chhote lal’s house.
take them to a workplace where a number of works are being done, and make them help others if possible.
write in table.
land around school.
my garden is in plain place.
only the house of chhote lal musahar remained unaffected.
she fell down there.
what are they doing in the following pictures ?
bhusan said, father ! she is quite good.
after that, write about the divided part of the song and let them rehearse giving clappings at the points of 1 2 3 and 4.
bharatpur lies in the eastern part of municipality.
how old are your grand parents ?
after making one, if time permits ask them to make another one as well.
we all help him by keeping and taking out books, exercise books out of school bag.
people of different races live in our village.
table made by father is also used.
conduct the activities that encourage students all the time.
thus, the leakage was plugged.
if harmonium is not available, make any key-note and make students to rehearse it.
there is market as well.
bhakti thapa fought bravely even at the age of 80 to save malau fort.
plate.
he buys meet from the shop.
they need others’ help.
ask them to present what they have known and learnt in the class.
i know the head of my family.
i move my feet and waist.
make them printing after collecting different kinds of things such as thick paper, piece of wood, thread, cloth, colour, etc.
there is school as well.
we also help her.
it also swept the land and house of moti prasad.
what type of rules should you follow while going to water spout ,fair and festivals in your village ?
terai belt is a plain land.
work performed at home.
cut paper.
works of neighbourhood.
her school is near the village.
foods like dhido, chapatti are eaten to get energy.
observe in and around your family about the dress worn by old and young people.
make a house, a car or any animal by cutting paper boxes.
find out where these things were made by looking or asking and make a table and write them down there.
our living place.
we should behave nicely with our guest.
matina borrows things from her friends in need.
the goods were carried by planes.
lasata’s father has a cloth-stall.
why one should stand in queue while taking public services like tap, temples, post office, etc.
find helpless and handicaps in your neighbour and write their name.
suman studies in grade three.
works you do.
assuming the first white fret of madhya saptak of harmonium, let students rehearse rising and falling of vocal sound along with clapping.
mark for the things that are available at your school.
collage made from broken bangles.
write about your class mates and their bad habits that need to be quit.
make them to use the colours and discuss.
relatives and friends send letters through the post office.
all neighbours take different kinds of food.
dress worn by old people.
my sister goes to school to study.
good and nice behaviour.
they found there was a police post to the east of the health post.
clear light enters from the window.
name of things.
i wear my uniform.
try out once to make things of your choice.
in aang chhiring’s neighbourhood, all the people participate while celebrating festivals.
by bringing medicine when neighbours are sick.
he has earned good name and money from his profession.
father is forty years old and mother is thirty five.
what kind of designs can be made by the print of fingers.
my father is the youngest son.
i am delaying, wondering what to do, go or return.
let's apply colour on our hand and print it on paper.
what kind of place is called tar ?
helpless and handicaps in neighbourhood.
thats why we respect them.
even if there aren't blind people in your community, there may be other kind of physically challenged persons.
make your students tell the relation and name of family members by describing the given pictures in the activities and lesson.
activities.
due due her politeness deepa was helped even by the strangers.
make and show the map of your ward.
which are things did anuja buy out of rs. 70 ?
in the beginning, his sister was also afraid.
let's print a leaf.
my mother's maternal home is in kathmandu.
write down the answer to the above questions in a proper order.
encourage students to find such good people and work together.
bal bhadra kunwar proved his bravery in the battle of nalapani.
collage made from paper by cutting it.
nhuja lives in a town.
a few roads looked bigger and wider.
thats why we should not break, cut phone wires.
go out of the class and observe the houses outside and practise to draw map of one house that you saw.
make a hole on the upper part of the creation made by the students and hang it on the nail once it is completely dry and organize an exhibition.
everyone likes the shoes sewed by him.
practise the song and dance based on my nepali book grade–i many times in the same way other songs and dances.
students may know the names of clothes and foods other than that given above.
i turn backward forward moving my feet and soles.
get the print from any object.
first, discuss and then, collect things.
table.
once you fold the paper and cut it as given in the following picture, you get a piece of square paper.
my name is sarbin sayami.
your friend has made the following table of work for helping the neighbour.
we should properly arrange cut or teared paper of different shape.
now draw eyes, mouth and beard like that of a dog.
even you can make your students act out these ways given above or some other ways in the class.
tap, well, inn, schools, ground, pond, road, etc. are our public properties.
his wife assists him and other family members also join her to help him.
our traditions, social values and norms.
it is easy to walk.
i came back home with the things and the remaining money.
your friend's home.
budani looked at the germs.
now make eyes, mouth and stripes like that of a tiger.
uma is my neighbour.
my mother assigns resposibilities of work to all family members.
my parents live in kathmandu khusibun.
near the village, there is a river.
after making the flat plate or slab, make your favourite figure or picture on the plate with a small stick.
my village lies in municipality.
there is a temple in the village.
uma’s house is close to mine.
he and i study and play together.
you too walk uphill.
from that day binod stopped running after the superstitions.
dhangadi a big town of far western region.
we help and love her.
answer the following questions.
let's draw pictures we like.
we have to teach him how to speak.
the objective of this lesson is to give students information about the different places, where they live in.
from high up, you can see things far off.
look at the pictures, how have they been made ?
express the meaning of the class-room song by the hand postures, giving the rhythm by backward-forward movements of feet.
make students practise clap and gap, repeatedly before playing madal.
letters made from clay.
how is your school ?
get the print by placing the paper on top of it.
mailimaya’s, daughter next to our house, is still young.
your home.
sichu is looking at the houses outside and is sketching the exact map of those houses.
make students aware of doing their work by them-selves and assist family members in their work.
they love us and tell us good stories and teach us household duties.
what is the name of your rural municipality or municipality where live in ?
after showing them different activities carried out by parents at home ask them to tell about it.
what do you say to father’s father ?
based on the work who is the head of the family ? ask them to find.
what if the tailor does not stitch clothes ?
ms. ita is one of the inhabitant of sinamangal which is very near from airport.
janaki studies in grade three.
he met some people on the way.
amu is a good neighbour.
the pictures given above are only samples relating to household works.
eid is celebrated in salim's house.
write down the work that you did in a week and show it to the teacher.
people rest there.
likewise make them draw the picture of the place they are living.
i can tell the boundary of the ward and the names of the ward members and can participate in the development work.
write down.
sugar is made from sugarcane.
look at the pictures and say which one is a good habit.
school and health post were far from their home before.
can you provide help for that work ?
do the activities of the lesson by making students observe the nearby land which consists of high, low and plain land.
one of the neighbour works in the field.
his sister rushed out.
hide inside the house.
our teacher came to teach us in the class.
they also joined the queue.
then she answered, she was born in hauga ward of patan.
what types of dresses do your family members wear ?
chhewang’s brother teaches in a school.
sometimes, we also clean the surrounding of our house by sweeping.
when they reached koteshwor, the vehicle which they were riding stopped at the pole near the street when it glew red.
let's respect the occupation of our family and the neighbour.
everyone appreciates him due to his good behaviour.
we behave properly and nicely with all.
he takes his brother and sister with him to school.
what sorts of clothes do most of your neighbour wear ?
we shoud help as much as we can for upgrading of our country.
i do the works assigned by my mother.
i wear sewed clothes.
most of the people here follow hindu, buddhists religion.
what is the name of your mother ?
the last day of ramjan is called id-ul-fitr.
sanumaya is my friend and neighbour.
what kind of persons need the following things ?
therefore, they could not get a place to live and food to eat.
we should live in good terms with our neighbours.
in the meantime, lumana came to fetch water.
in this tihar i along with my friends went in the new year festival to wish.
how to make ?
let them take the piece of clay in their hands and let them turn it in round shapes or rounded structure.
but she had read in the school that ghost is just a superstition.
her uncle's house lies in village.
stand on the chair.
divide students in different groups and make them collect different things.
there are many forests and rivers in her district.
things made in town.
harmonium.
we learned many things of glory.
pen should be handled properly without biting.
we respect our neighbours.
our village also looks smaller like this when we look at it from a high place.
almirah.
what do you do ?
all the people of the village become rich.
we must be good to our neighbour even if he is not good.
deepa studies in grade three.
flower.
people of the village make mat, wicker basket by staying at their homes.
soap are made from ritta.
the pond was made by the people of the town.
the lesson was, help in family work.
we saw the place given in the following map.
what a problem could have been to me.
write down on the basis of this lesson.
they eat grain, fruits and vegetables of their own field.
if there is a blind person in your community, ask him which work he finds easy and difficult and write them in the following table.
a person who lives near to our house is called a neighbour.
then, i put water on the vegetable, plants of my kitchen-garden.
commodities produced here are also exported to foreign countries.
as in the lesson, collect the pictures from the old magazines and books in your school or home related with the ornaments and dresses worn by different communities and display them in the class.
bishnumati river is flowing in front of jagatsundar school.
what type of way do you follow when you go to school from your home ?
on the way, he reached the school to find the roof of the school blown away by the wind.
at night i went to play bhailo.
153goddess durga is worshipped during dashain festival.
our respectful heroes.
since by group’s effort, a better painting and creative arts can be made, let them work in the group.
thats why we have to keep care of long benches and desks of the school.
let's collect things for printing.
biska is one of the biggest and cherishable festival of khowpa country.
which things are needed to clean your school ?
make them act to move their feet in rhythm according to the words of song.
luja's mother called lumanti up made her sit at the sofa and said wait a moment, lumanti.
take the students outside of their class and show different types of houses around the school and make them sketch the map of houses.
official works in the office.
find out sources of water around your school or your house.
map of home.
have a discussion by giving different examples and telling them to observe the area nearby their residence.
there is a garden nearby the house.
i work together with my friends.
practise the bol given above.
we study and play together.
father’s father should be called grandfather.
what is your name ?
describe different kinds of disabilities which students could not tell.
the things used in building house are given below.
study and play together.
what things are grown in your place ?
we went to shop.
tools used in farming are made by harka daju of the village.
make them practise many times on the 8 scale beating of madal’s rhythm.
my uncle helps him when he requires to work with two hands.
have you ever observed its surroundings from higher place ?
he started weeping saying ghost-ghost.
to colour.
chautaro is also our common property.
what are people doing in the following pictures ?
make arrangement to exhibit their creations.
they should be known that every work holds its own importance and there is no big or small work.
cut paper in square shape and make a fish out of it.
i play football.
so, our neighbours have different living-styles.
now, he has come to live at trishuli bazaar.
sing and dance with all of your friends.
my name is anis.
he has been collecting money by doing this work.
ask childrens to fill the pictures with the colour they like.
you also ask and write about your neighbour’s food habit like palpasa have done.
he sells the products grown in the field and collects income.
his father contacted uncline through phone to provide information.
what things are there around your school ?
make students observe the things that they find around the school and make them say each thing one by one.
they did not know the way to the school.
budaniya did not recover.
bhusan need to do the homework of soical studies book.
write about the family members of your friends in the following table as shown in the example.
chart.
i started using things made in my village understanding the fact that many goods are manufactured in factories.
draw the following traffic signals in your notebook and follow them.
take students to observe the public places and practise activities to tell the names of the visited public places.
ghansyham is another neighbour.
this is our common property.
make the students collect different kinds of papers and objects.
tell the students to imitate the sounds and movements of birds and animals as given above.
write down their names.
rice,maize, paddy, millet, soyabean are grown in the field.
i use homemade things.
tell students about theme of the song before singing it.
by bringing water from the tap.
this lesson tries to give the concept of natural resources like river, forest, pond, lake, mountain to the students.
let students tell about helpless and handicaps of their neighbouring area.
our village in the map.
grandfather is sixty five years old.
ram sharan does not even buy things he needs.
look at the pictures below and tick the things that are at your home.
several things can be made from thick paper.
dhaka cap, blouse, shawl, coat of the village are made in the dhaka industry of the village.
pointed cap.
collectively, they find the solution of the problem of neighbours.
manage to display their creative arts.
oh ! namaste volunteer sister ! please be seated for a moment.
we should respect the person who does good work.
foods like vegetables, fruits, maize, wheat grown in the field are being eaten.
copy only the right work in your exercise-book.
recognize the people in the following pictures and how should you respect your seniors ? say.
these clothes goes to the foreign countries too.
tell the theme of the song to the students before making them to sing it.
ask three senior people the following questions in your family and neighbourhood and write down their responses.
we learn more about disability what we do not know from her.
i can fill up the major things of my village or town in a map.
folding once and opening slowly.
the list is as follows.
choose by looking at the pictures.
which things were stuck to have the following pictures ?
i eat snack after returning from school.
lumanti and luja study in grade two.
tyamko.
some people are involved in farming.
relatives.
som bahadur’s house is at kuwapani of dhankuta.
i try to help my family members at my home.
walking.
draw the picture of person or an object you love.
some of the clothes made in the industry are worn by the the villagers.
they use good looking and expensive pots and pans though they have beautiful and durable pots and pans made in the village.
one who sits in a shop is called shop-keeper.
they are inside.
after making a slab of clay, make your favourite design or figure.
﻿me, my family and neighbour.
he preferred dresses like docha, bakkhu, pangden made locally in his own country.
here is an example.
her parents work in the field.
tell them to make new colours from the above colours and ask them questions.
hill.
work is the only big thing.
after lumana finished taking water he took bath.
how did his nhuja's father provide information to her uncle ?
cut potato or other vegetable.
ask your parents and make a list of good works performed by them.
like umesh write in the table and show.
the place where i live is neither hot nor cold.
write and show.
let students discuss their experience in creating the objects and make arrangements for the display of the made objects in class.
what sorts of food do you eat ?
say the name of colours.
habit of waitting for turn.
i have had mental disease.
write about the cow by looking or asking.
draw pictures of your choice.
write sequentially.
i am also a man like you.
what are the works done by your neighbours ?
the newars wear different kinds of costumes matching with the festivals.
try to practise the bol by beating madal.
i can sketch a simple map of my village / town.
i read books with care.
matina has a habit of helping others.
christmas is celebrated at elisa’s house.
now a days, he has been living in his maternal uncle's house.
mother! sister and brother-in-law have come.
he caught the picture of kumari and said, at indrajatra kumari wears such costume.
they are also human-be-ings like us.
blackboard.
several festivals are celebrated in different places.
people collect at the inn.
first, make your students read the lesson and after that take them to outside the class.
god bless you boy.
nhuja's father after talking with uncle over the phone in his turn came back.
thats why tuisi gave lumana turn first.
tell a story that it is beneficial to be economic and harmful to be spend thrift.
how the shapes are arranged, discuss.
they have different customs.
while celebrating festivals things that are in house are not enough.
she also takes pop corn made at her home as tiffin to school.
milk is obtained from cow.
there are also enough desks and benches.
i study with naswa.
pemba lives at chandanbari of rasuwa district.
when you are sick get your health checked in health-post or in hospital.
sheel shova called the fire brigade.
she also knows the people very far away from her house.
if students require teach them properly by sitting in front of them.
there are grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, brothers, bhauju and sisters in my home.
draw a picture of your favourite thing found in your house.
we should take care of it.
ask them to tell similar works carried out by their parents at home.
invite him to your house.
our brave ancestors indeed have done many good things.
which direction is your home located from your school ?
jamuna also lends her things to her friend.
rama said, it  would look pretty small, sir.
there may be other helpless and handicapped children in our society.
what is superstition ?
which sorts of following work matches to the work you do ?
kamala said, teacher ! i have a little brother at home.
where is your maternal uncle’s home ?
they all live together.
for what purposes, they are being used ?
i gave that money to my mother.
his main job is to sew shoes.
some people do jobs.
languages and costumes of my village.
you also write the dates of birth and birth places of your five friends as luja did in the table.
budani saw a man standing on the road.
i read, write, clean and playwith my friends at school.
in collage, whole page can be covered with one kind of figure.
farmer uses plough.
which clothes do you like to wear ?
ask your parents and write what the people of your village wear in a particular festival.
she called him today too.
cut the wood or thick paper in the form of house and make the map of house in your exercise book.
let us cut paper in square.
i will write more next time.
rising.
he has neighbours around.
encourage the students to play the role of different characters of lessons as well.
write down your birth place.
how did the locals of urmila's village control the land fall caused by chauri river ?
paper plane.
what things can you see from your school?
the market was crowded very much.
in our village, different castes have different languages and different costumes.
i joined friends to play bhailo in this year.
the garden is plain.
design pamphlets with the following slogans to present them in the class, “don’t litter the area”,  "drink boiled water only", “protect the public property”, “ plant trees to preserve the land fall and soil erosion”.
terai is plain land.
temples, monasteries, inn should also be conserved.
the teacher should listen the cassette of the class song before teaching.
his father guides the tourists.
make the map of the place where you live in.
show students different forms of land.
he is seventy years old person.
worshiping the sun.
copy out the correct statements in your copy.
make students put paper on top of colour, rub wax on it then colour on it and carry out other activities like these.
since the kul bahadur's village is in the hilly region, there are both high and plain land.
they live quite close to each other in the same ward.
make a table like the one below.
some people do business.
we can cut thick paper as we like and can get the print by applying colour to it.
jujukaji became happy.
what kind of industries and factories have you seen ?
in their neighbourhood, there are also families who celebrate festivals like holi, chhath, id, etc.
river is big.
in this way, repeat till the count of seven and on the count of eight let them come to the position of attention.
so, now the forest has been sparsed.
cutting the paper.
television.
helpless and handicaps in school.
creations constructed by students should be brought under discussion and make arrangement to exhibit them.
there is also a post-office near aju's house.
who are the persons in your neighbourhood who help each other ?
vegetable.
identify your food.
prints made from potatoes.
now, there is a health post in that place.
how do you care for your goods ?
one should help friends by lending goods they do not have.
buying and bringing food.
encourage them to participate in different festivals in their neighbourhood.
your true friend.
after october/november november/december comes.
most of the goods used in raman’s house are made outside the village.
i take my meal.
show the students playing madal by the teacher first, then let them practise simultenously playing madal.
to begin with, the teacher asked the students of class three to write about the festivals observed in their villages.
my grandfather and grandmother have three sons and two daughter.
lessons to be learned from the past.
why are palistha’s neighbours good ?
look at your friend’s picture to see how yours is different from his/her.
one day, after his meal, he went out in the evening to wash his hands.
cleaning water tap and well.
near the temple there is a small inn.
i also have children like you.
ask students to make a list of the things made at their home and also, encourage them to use homemade things.
first of all keep students in a line and in an attentive position.
put similar things at one place.
at other times we also visit different places.
ask students to say what people are doing in the given pictures.
we should not cooperate in the wedding ceremony of neighbour’s.
i draw a picture of a person i like.
children's song.
luja's mother also sat beside lumanti.
falling.
like bhusan, who are good people in your community ?
most people of dhankuta drink that tea.
ask children about their maternal uncle’s home one by one.
my favourite person.
lhosar is celebrated in furwa's home.
this is the picture of village.
act out and show how you respect your mother, father.
his father took her round several places of kathmandu.
how do you take help from others ?
amu throws his clothes carelessly.
why should we preserve soil ?
chibha lives in a village.
in a clapping let them pronounce a vocal sound first, then in second step, pronunce two vocal sounds.
shrijana has paper toy in her hand.
a collage can be made of cut-outs, fixing printed pictures, photos and other colourful objects.
then after that they took deepa to the school.
deepa thanked them all.
where are lophophorus found in nepal?
also, help other mentally sick people who are dumb, deaf and mentally retarded.
272.
i lend things to friends and borrow things from them in need.
sundar! your home is in birgunj.
his father took her round koteshwor, baneshwor, babarmahal, maitighar, singha durbar, golden tap, bhotahiti and ratna park.
binod showed to his sister.
what do people do through the post office ?
i wake up early in the  morning.
sugarcane is essential for sugar factory.
i take chilly from my own kitchen garden.
i could not recognize you.
i am a health volunteer.
write down the benefits of the present occupation on the basis of the lesson.
by folding or cutting papers, we can make different objects or shapes.
i eat my tiffin in the noon.
draw the boundary of your surroundings of your village / municipality.
how is your classroom ?
now, they do not believe in ghost.
while on a narrow path, walk slowly to avaid a fall.
bhusan showed the questionnaire form.
i do not shout at my parents to buy unnecessary things.
they even sacrificed their lives for the country.
people will not have place to rest in collapsed chautaro.
they are known as the brave sons of nepal.
and what colour you like ?
our teacher taught us about our past yesterday.
what are bad habits ?
look at the following pictures and write what is going on.
lakhsari wears dhaka shawl produced in her own village.
teach them by conducting discussion and demonstrate to take care of any thing or their personal belongings and use them properly without wasting them.
if they behave badly, give them feedback and teach them required thing.
she keeps on helping everybody.
i help my father.
in our class, we have a friend with only one hand.
taking and giving money.
which kind of land is your school located on ?
small.
fold from backside.
there is a temple a bit up from the tap.
i helped jamuna.
i go to my maternal uncle’s home in different festivals like dashain, tihar with my mother.
i am outside the home.
i joined the school at the age of 6.
doctor showed germs difficult to see by bare eyes in budani's stool.
how do you feel if someone says i don’t eat food of your touch, don’t come close, never step into my home.
income will be generated nicely if there is job.
similarly, make students draw different maps by joining dots and numbers.
visual arts.
what day, date, month and year is today ?
lumanti asked her mother, when did luja born ?
robin always demands new clothes from his father.
answer the following questions on the basis of the lesson.
consumer’s committee is there to protect the community forests there.
a lot of mustard and rice grows as it has fertile land.
184.
collect pieces of different things from outside the class to make collage.
jute bags are made from sunpat.
as a result, their children janaki, ramesh, sohan and ramita are able to study in school.
cut the paper in a square shape.
just arrived, mother.
urmila had also helped while planting those plants.
a thick cloth worn by the sherpa caste of the himalayan region is known as bakhu.
look, recognize and imitate the sound as them.
apply colour on the leaf.
for example, i asked my brother, uncle and father, “what should we do when a guest visits our home ?
encourage students to make different shapes by providing soil.
this is hasana's house.
fold from inside.
drink.
people there especially celebrate gaura festival.
figure made by adding clay on the clay plate.
lumanti asked again.
encourage students to introduce the people of their neighbourhood by using relation-addressing and respectful words.
people of other villages also have learnt several things from man maya’s village.
like badri or gita, you also describe the place where you live in ?
they said, sure, dear, we will take you there.
we also help him.
timila, though, a child has the sense of importance of work done by different people.
having breakfast.
they helped deepa to get up.
write the name of the things you use.
a little further he saw the water droping through the pipe on the road.
our parents are happy to see our work.
bus and phone are also things that are required by all.
you shoud tell the instructions given in the lesson.
budani said, crossing a way by an animal is not any thing of bad omen.
what type of land is there in the following pictures ?
they work and celebrate their festivals together.
nheumila, furwa, ramdas, elisa and salim invite to each other on their festivals.
the art created by folding papers is called origami.
prepare students for clay-work, after selecting soil.
we should be happy of our own language, costume and culture.
what work do you do at present ?
we celebrate a number of festivals through out the year.
let them draw pictures on different subjects like family, friend, and the person he likes.
my sister is fourtee years old.
help students to select the subject of drawing and encourage them to draw.
he thought to repair it.
paper work.
this is sichu's classroom.
they were able to show bravery due to love and affection they had for their country.
neighbours celebrate different kinds of festival.
tell any five works of your neighbour.
homemade things.
helpless and handicaps are found in a village and a town too.
look at the following pictures of tools and say which are required and which are not required to draw pictures.
work with clay.
where are the things that are used at your friend's home made, write by looking or asking your friends.
what kind of transport facilities are available there ?
i do my work myself at home.
clay pressed with fist.
i can say the name of my three generations.
radio, television, watch are made in the foreign country.
businessman uses balance.
decoration of tree is done in christmas.
she also saw zebra crossing in the middle of the wide road from one end to another end.
aliens.
practise students to mix colours.
i am a girl.
my mother buys books and copies for me.
they exchange goods in need necessity.
here goods like cloth, thread, biscuits, shoes, television, soap, etc are produced.
i help my parents at home.
this kathmandu is a valley.
inspire students to make different things as shown in the above pictures.
as a result, the other houses around did not caught fire.
his neighbours are all friendly.
nepal sambat new year is celebrated in tihar.
draw a picture of your location to show it with your friend.
he is hardworking since the childhood.
they both are eldest at home.
students not only at home but can also make different things at school.
grains.
which thing matches which in the following pictures ?
paper is made from grass,hay.
we should respect our neighbour who does good work.
manju also described the work she does.
i will also draw a flower.
i can differentiate high-land, low-land, plain, khonch and tar.
i have to ask you many other questions also.
practise students to eat the food produced in their village and use the things manufactured in their village.
cooker.
hariman's father works in the field.
this is badri’s village.
show students different pictures given in the lesson and let them describe what is shown in the picture.
after study, she keeps her books, exercise-book and pen in the school bag.
grandmother is sixty.
our common property.
the practise should be initiated from the right foot and sole moving forward upto the counting of eight, and again upto the counting of eight, come back to the previous position.
there was no facility of roads.
look understand and do.
aju plays with his friends in the ground.
brushing teeth.
clothes are made from cotton.
drop the habit of walking or running in a haste on the road.
play with clay.
practise to draw straight and curve lines.
you can be show by acting out the local ways of respecting.
my mother looks after all family members.
make arrangement to exhibit the collage pictures made by students.
they illuminate their house with the help of solar energy and cook their food with biogas.
the pictures given above are only samples relating to works of neighbourhood.
mother’s father is called grandfather.
people of different castes live here in the municipality.
don't cut trees adhockly.
the big flood swept the whole village.
he wound up the broken pipe with the polythene which he had.
now think, how the window, roof and the door might have been made of this house.
sit infront and look carefully rwhile doing activities of cutting figures on things.
a place with more himalayas is called himalyan region.
protection of public property.
people sit on the chautaro.
respect our seniors.
the questions prepared by him were like this.
if they show good behaviour congratulate them.
i colour it.
act out with your friends and show.
show students sound of different animals and birds with acting.
he saw his village at a distance.
the ward number is 17.
i can draw the picture of my school.
their names are as follows.
look, recognize and read.
what should i do to become a person like you?
thats why, thammaya aunty of that village is very  good.
his mother teaches in a local school.
a box with four divisions.
write down which of the following are good manners ?
above mentioned activities are only some examples.
clarify the meaning of solar energy and bio gas if they do not know.
what kind of materials can be collected to make a collage ?
i eat foods made in my home.
things your friend gave you.
similarly, he also takes his juniors arround his surroundings with him to the school.
make your student say the names of the given clothes one by one.
sahanai.
my birthday.
i will practise moving my hands to dance.
by using only four varieties of rough materials, make a collage with clear figure.
chauri river flowing downwards has troubled the people by causing land fall.
take care of your belongings, dont spoil.
such collage should be made on stiff and thick paper using glue or gum.
they have distinct festivals and languages.
take kneaded clay in your hand.
the tea of that place is very tasty.
after that, he started saying,  we should not say about touchability and untouchablilty.
nepalgung is a big city.
divide the class into groups and observe whether they are playing together or not.
a person who involved in farming is called a mason.
how does nhuja receive visitors at home ?
bicycles, rickshaws and vehicles run along the road.
friend’s family then and now.
i take care and clean my things of home and school.
make things of your choice by cutting and joining thick paper.
i do my work myself.
how does your pencil look like ?
the teacher assembled all the students in a place after the tour.
to provide information about different costumes, different kinds of competition can be organized.
i am basanti.
cook rice.
place it on top of paper get a print.
this is called zebra crossing.
fold the paper backside.
thats why for today this much.
computer.
teacher teaches in the school.
my parents are happy with my good habits.
we should give help and take help among familiar persons.
my feets are paining.
i polish my shoes myself.
desk.
likewise they also saw a big play ground there.
make students tell who is helping in what works in the above pictures.
visit one of the working places.
how would you arrange help if you were deepa ?
copy.
everyone has has a right to walk his/her way.
where is rhododendron found ?
he has to be lead in crossing the road.
i help my mother to check patients.
take out prints from different objects.
we, the students of class two, all went to visit it with our teacher.
what things are there in your classroom ?
look at the following pictures and tell what type of help they need.
let's print.
then every one will be happy.
i help my grandfather.
there is a forest away from the town.
who are the people we should help to ?
crimson is our national colour.
i will clap.
how the children are helping their neighbours.
i carry the things of the shop and showcase them outside.
frying pan of birgunj is quite famous.
this city also lies as the major city of nepal.
who is the head of your family ?
what different shapes did you find ?
i have been living in municipality.
they also attend friend’s festival and enjoy.
i came here to ask if there are children below 5 years age in this house.
after they make the clay round in shape, ask them to make different kinds of objects.
while going to school i walk uphill.
in his village, there is a big tea garden.
it is also the capital of our country.
the proper use of things.
what does the head do at your home ?
in that case, it will really be a bad omen.
when i lose sense, i cry, shout and wear clothes abnormally and in such cases treat me properly.
paper toys.
children should be taught to recognize the good people of the community and should also teach them to respect such people.
my living place lies in the mountain, hill, terai, valley region.
supply hay to cow, buffalo, sheep, and goat.
let students imagine and print.
let them collect old newspaper for oregamy.
what are the things that you have in your classroom ?
people of this place work in fields.
instead you may spoil your duty because you will get late.
what does sajhya do to the materials taken from his friends ?
by serving water in the feast organized in the neighbourhood.
they eat varieties of food grown in their fields.
where do you live in, town or village ?
the same soap is used for washing clothes.
father’s brother is called uncle.
discuss it in the class and write down.
the chautaro, taps, inn, post office, ground, health-post and schools etc. are the public places.
we will not have food to eat if the farmer does not grow crops.
then they followed suman.
discuss with children about local musical instruments.
sleep.
anis’ grandmother is thirty five years old.
i am a boy.
collage can be made by using many different types of things.
i wonder what brought you here ?
there are different age groups in anis’s home.
mother’s mother is called grandmother.
he is a person who limps on one foot.
that forest consumer's committee is protecting the forest in the region.
let's make favourite shapes and things.
which places do you have to the east, west, north and south of your ward ?
therefore, they constructed dams and planted trees to stop it.
bal bhadra kunwar, amar singh thapa and bhakti thapa are brave sons of nepal.
some times back only, we went on educational tour with our teacher.
anis’s grandfather is sixty five years old.
observe major places over there.
more.
what different shapes of pictures are made from a piece of paper, paste and look.
good deeds done by the people of the community have equal importance.
have your ever played by collecting easity available things like clay, stick, cloth, feather ?
fold the paper as shown in the picture and make a bird.
i also have father and mother at home.
what do you call the one who lives close to your house ?
is there a practice of rejecting the food of by others' touch in your place ?
we should respect good work of all kinds.
a playground is  also there nearby his house.
what would you do to protect the forest close to your area ?
how old are your parents ?
tell students origamy is the art of making different shapes by folding paper.
at their turn, they worshipped and returned home.
by obeying the elders’ orders in festival.
janaki’s father and her neighbours started doing work which is different than previous.
i drew lines with colour.
complete the table on the basis of the lesson.
stick the triangular paper on one after and make a paper tree.
like above, draw a table about your two friends and show them to your teacher.
go to an open space blind-folded and play a game as directed by the teacher.
one was leading to deepa’s school and the path other down the village.
encourage students to speak out themselves.
the priest offers flower and tika to all people.
make them act out the role of helping each other when they cannot do some works themselves.
make them do the activities under proper supervision as injuries can happen at the time of doing this sort of things.
hasana’s home is in high land.
everybody likes sajhya's good habit.
look, read and talk about the pictures.
then make her move left leg only.
the place where i live.
if you see blind people with a white cane like me, please help them.
people celebrate it by singing, dancing and eating tasty food.
ektare.
villagers get grass, fire-wood and timber from the forest.
say namaste to him.
engage students to act out the role of people with visual, walking, hearing, talking and other types of physical disability and advice them how to help such disable people.
make them observe different forms of land around their school.
ask your maternal uncle's and aunt's name and write.
good neighbours.
now a days i use my things by taking proper take care of it.
never say students that the shapes made by them is not good.
to work for the betterment of the country is love towards it.
glass.
the path was narrow.
make students trace the picture by placing a thin paper on top of it.
bhusan does not know the way back home.
why should public chautaros be protected ?
after copying the following questions in your exercise book, answer it by asking with your next-door neighbour.
i drew pictures with a pencil and crayon.
in this way, we wrote about the festivals that we observed in our village.
discuss with the students about the models prepared by them.
even women and children fought fiercely in that war.
teach them as requrired by watching who is doing properly and who is not.
cut paper in square.
before singing national anthem song, let them practice it by clapping or by using madal.
during tihar crow, dog, cow, goddess laxmi, own body, brothers and sisters are worshipped.
there were tall, small, and new, old houses nearby.
soul.
all human beings are same.
they wear different kinds of clothes.
there are 12 months in a year.
she is good at studies.
which of the things  are made at your home and which are made outside your home?
you also make such hand toys.
her father and i took her to hospital.
to love physically challenged.
aha ! what a wonderful family kamala has, teacher said.
where is luja's birth place ?
my name is naswa.
you also make different animals-birds or things from ball of clay, stick and leaves.
i don't write nonsense in my copy and book, mess my writing.
show the above pictures to the students and tell them to draw straight, upright, inclined, curve and different lines with the help of pestle, chalk, pencil etc.
people fast for one whole month in this festival.
what happened ?
also, look at the map of your friends and show you rmap to them.
our past.
my name is arhat.
let's play with colours.
taking bath near the bank of pond or a river is done during chhat.
as far as possbile organize activities which can inspire them to use such things.
some people are involved in business and others in service.
by this they will develop an exploring habit.
i live in rural municipality or municipality.
in which zone does your district fall ?
here, these kinds of examples are shown.
shortly, they reached the fork path.
they buy and use those things only that are not available there.
make students to write their date of birth and place with the help of their parents.
apply glue here and join the paper.
what tools are required for that work ?
the shuttle rickshaws and carriages shuttle are seen along the road.
this is our national flag.
every one loves me.
chhewang  showed the place of  his neighbours then and now in the table.
the house of the map though nice was small.
mark the correct one.
in this collage, colourful pieces of paper are stuck closely.
namaskar, son-in-law, when did you arrive ?
i take care of the belongings at my home.
one has to climb uphill.
all come to the feast.
which are the wards you have lived ?
assigning responsibilities of work.
divide the class into groups and involve them in role play of heling others, and teach them to help each other.
ask them one by one what works do they do daily in their houses and teach them to do daily works by themselves.
write them observing or asking.
add sufficient water to make it clay.
social problems and solutions.
i can tell my friend’s family’s living places then and now.
his left hand is shorter.
all human beings are equal.
my mother’s name is bhagban devi manandhar.
in the eastern part of my municipality lies the forest.
he respects his elders.
laachi's uncle was handicapped since birth.
my home is at pipaltar.
make collage by remembering your favorite game.
in the evening, we have to worship by offering chicken's eggs.
it rains less during winter.
since, the objective of the lesson is to give the concept to the students that from a low-land things of close-distance and from the high-altitude things of far-distance can be seen, make students visit different places and let them express about the places they have seen.
why do people go to health post ?
do it standing on one place.
clap according to 1 (ghi) and 2 (naa).
mila said, i live near likhutirtha.
her elder sister called shaman.
let's play with colour.
look at the wall calendar and write down the festivals of any one month and mention the day of celebration.
so, she switched on and went close to see what it was.
what work have you done for all ?
make butterfly and a crow by folding the paper.
map of our place.
know yourself.
now, what should i make next ?
things made in village.
write the name of three festivals that we celebrate.
write the name of public places.
he became very happy to see chhote lal’s helpful behavour.
they go to shop only to buy things that are very essential to them.
write their names.
i change my dress.
make posters and playcards of rules to be obeyed by the students in the classroom.
take any one soap with its wrapper that is used at your home.
he saw something near the courtyard.
river.
bed.
where does tuisi live ?
milk.
sanumaya lives in kathmandu.
we all have the same blood colour.
i play madal.
my father told me all these things.
he  lives at vijay chok village in nawalparasi district.
identify the given person below.
i went to the shop with the list of things and hundred rupees.
her school's name is "jagatsundar school".
you also write a letter to your friend with things you have learnt from the study of social studies and present it in the class.
after making this much make an eye of the bird on that paper.
who are there at your maternal uncle’s home ?
there are no rules while pasting paper, it is enough for students know how to paste.
he took us round the major places of the metropolitan city.
we will talk next time okay.
this is palistha's village.
fill in the blanks with appropriate words.
in our village people speaking different languages, wearing different dresses and ornaments live together in harmony.
timila lives in a village.
they did farming, fishing, collecting fuel from forest, gardening, pot making etc.
he prefers local dresses.
please come along, i will take you to the school.
how would you help your neighbour ?
what sorts differently able friends are in your school ?
she went to visit kathmandu with her father during the winter vacation.
the people of urmila's village also happy due to the greenary of the village.
make them colour the objects already made as per design.
things made from paper.
look, identify and draw.
umesh helped his parents in the following ways at his home.
acting.
untouchability is a social crime.
we should cross the road only when the light is green.
help the helpless.
i can move my foot with soles.
people buy and sell goods at the inn.
i clean playground, tap of schol.
