horizontal text.
choose the order of information to appear in the list view.
highresolution edge detection.
japan 's finance ministry had set up mechanisms to limit how far futures prices could fall in a single session and to give market operators the authority to suspend trading in futures at any time.
the default displaylimit for package views.
could not start the search process.
cdrom drive.
acapulco.
remove fill.
resize window on zoom.
upgrade.
in the u.s. over-the-counter market american depositary shares for reuters each representing three shares in the london market closed unchanged at $ 43.875.
antarctica/casey.
as such industrialists are more concerned with investing for short term personal gains rather than for long germ national economy.
not rounded.
expected element found instead.
select existing area.
the remote user from will be disconnected. are you sure?
asia/aqtobe.
armenian.
the gnome image viewer.
default reminder value.
reply.
couldn't add revoker.
if set, an underline in the text indicates the next character should be used for the mnemonic accelerator key.
while loan realization in comparison to loan disbursement was 37.2 percent in 1974/75, the overdue portion of the outstanding loan gradually increased to 58 percent in 1989/90.
other authors are.
you already are root!
imported certificate.
selection box color.
to the surprise of some analysts net cash income rose in some of the hardest-hit states including indiana illinois nebraska and the dakotas.
novokuznetsk.
net advanced to $ 94.2 million or 89 cents a share from $ 85 million or 83 cents a share including net realized investment gains of $ 31 million up from $ 10 million a year ago.
nanaimo.
no more tables.
the vectorfield. leftclick to move selected vector, rightclick to point it towards mouse, middleclick to add a new vector.
contrast.
download.
width is in absolute units.
general.
log out.
select folder.
shear.
in a labor-intensive process the seed companies cut off the tassels of each plant making it male sterile.
zoom out.
digital code.
rep. james traficant d. ohio said the amendment which passed 271-147 would  let the american worker know that we consider them occasionally.
unable to send file to user does not support file transfers.
rexburg.
calligraphic preferences.
stroboscope light.
home page.
the new environment created by liberal economic policies will also promote the increase of the investment growth rate.
file type/version unsupported.
buddy goes idle.
whether the child's tab should fill the allocated area or not.
has become idle.
ual would n't elaborate on a statement that it had been notified of the filing by reliance.
scale imported paths to fit image.
print memos.
enable antialiasing.
make the window fullscreen.
attached schema ' to key '.
can't rename to final output file.
conjunctive use of groundwater will be encouraged to be used in areas not irrigable round the year by surface system only.
use global proxy settings.
deletes the selected preset.
y position of child widget.
search for solutions to unsatisfied dependencies.
at the same time, the genetic diversity of agricultural crops will be utilized for the development of export-oriented products.
it is necessary to promote productive investment policies which encourage the private sector to save and to direct their investment from the unproductive sector like real estate to the sectors capable of achieving higher economic growth rate such as industry.
create gradient in the fill.
all came from cray research.
key has been superseded.
very often a good library may serve the purpose.
file not in a supported format.
examine the currently selected solution to the dependency problems.
we flat ran out of financing resources  mr. jerritts said.
invalid entry in keybinding group.
specify the type of the list value being set, or the type of the value a schema describes. unique abbreviations ok.
email signer certificate.
video pattern.
the senate-house conference committee is used when a bill is passed by the house and senate in different forms.
couldn't read file.
flow label.
activity mode.
sketch input.
show button images.
participation.
cancel.
the son of a specialist and once one himself mr. phelan has nonetheless been striving with products like the new stock basket that his former colleagues dislike so much to keep index funds and other program traders from taking their business to overseas markets.
out of these, there were one general post office, 74 district post offices, 254 sub-post offices and 678 additional post offices.
write hot spot values.
plugins.
its entrenched 49 stock specialists firms are fighting tooth and nail against programs.
the problem involves the motion of small magnetic fields within superconductor crystals limiting their current-carrying capacity.
random motion.
thus, there is no doubt that science has brought the creation and devastation at our tip.
input controllers.
prepare this folder to be copied with a paste command.
apply layer masks.
the given file extension does not match the chosen file type.
several ridiculous projects continue including the  new international economic order  which means redistributionism from the west to pay for everyone else's statism.
resource class.
dining out usually involves eating heavily and unhealthily.
debian ' package archive backend version.
pan am has subpoenaed several government agencies including the cia and fbi to determine whether they were warned that a bomb had been planted aboard a jet that exploded over scotland last december killing 270 people.
active plugins.
africa/abidjan.
refresh the folder.
no package named ' is installed, cannot configure.
don't start a new instance of rhythmbox.
remove existing tiled clones of the selected object siblings only.
failed to delete contact.
name used a second time.
signing certificate.
rotate colors.
kalkar.
options to modify properties of a screen.
utility palette.
you must be an attendee of the event.
store profile stats in the specified file.
view previous display.
but columbia 's good bank would be a regulated thrift while the bad bank would be a private investment company holding some of columbia 's junk bonds real estate and equity investments.
miscellaneous shapes.
maximum height for bumps.
but as the craze died coleco failed to come up with another winner and filed for bankruptcy-law protection in july 1988.
stereotype.
user does not exist.
canceling.
detroit.
perspective clone tool clone from an image source after applying a perspective transformation.
has stopped typing to you.
the yalign.
how to draw the input method statusbar.
tearoff title.
error failed to load parameters.
profile.
this game does not have hint support yet.
optimizing animation.
format not valid.
adequate measures will be effected in the promotion and extension of appropriate technology including irrigation management improvement.
israel.
minimum length of scrollbar slider.
adjust how much the saturation should be changed randomly.
entry.
the diversion file is corrupted.
this option will connect to the pop server using an encrypted password via the apop protocol. this may not work for all users even on servers that claim to support it.
returns greater than.
packages which are suggested by other packages these packages are not required in order to make your system function properly, but they may provide enhanced functionality for some programs that you are currently installing.
replace current document.
turks and caicos islands.
set language.
netherlands antilles.
none to pending.
palermo.
the major reason behind the 15.2 percent growth was the increase in overall index by 20.8 percent in 1991/92.
align lines left.
your window setup will be reset to default values the next time you start gimp.
gabon.
out of the total gross fixed investment of rs. 170,332 million, rs. 109,193 million 64.1 percent will be invested by the private sector while the remaining rs. 61,139 million 55.9 percent will be invested by the government sector table3.
crush.
toolbox.
kigoma.
perfect square, height equals width.
insert image.
search albums.
add out event port.
cannot find certificate chain.
unset the keys on the command line.
steve martin has already laid his claim to that.
you must work hard to be successful.
grid spacing.
select one object whose tiled clones to unclump.
pacific/easter.
the capacity utilization of some selected industries was about 63 percent during the period from 1975/76 to 1989/90.
itel corp. reported third-quarter earnings which were mistakenly shown in the quarterly earnings surprises table in yesterday's edition to be lower than the average of analysts' estimates.
show timezone field in the event/meeting editor.
the offer follows an earlier proposal by nl and mr. simmons to help georgia gulf restructure or go private in a transaction that would pay shareholders $ 55 a share.
cannot operate on unknown image types.
factorial.
because of this some operations may be unavailable.
similarly, the schoolstudent ration of 146 in 1961, recorded a significant increase to 1156 by april 1990.
when sorted by.
rockglen.
kenosha.
bulleted list.
berberati.
last.
similarly, agricultural credit to the tune of rs. 1,220.2 million is expected to have been made available.
background color.
the many diverse products of wetlands generate numerous socio-economic benefits that are important for the livelihood of local communities.
readonly.
bellaire.
amplify.
collaborator collaborators.
could not mount.
minutes.
zip archive.
all people and one resource.
one the transport front, although some roads were constructed in the past years, there are still no link roads to some district headquarters.
inconsistent state.
click in any image to view its color.
the matter  did n't involve anybody 's securities transactions  he added.
paint tool.
width of the messagelist pane.
meanwhile most investment-grade bonds ended unchanged to as much as 1/8 point higher.
pacific/enderbury.
the buttons shown in the message dialog.
an equal number in each month said that employment conditions were good.
they sow a row of male-fertile plants nearby which then pollinate the male-sterile plants.
torque.
bakers game.
gray threshold.
zip drive.
federal judges make $ 89,500 annually ; in february congress rejected a bill that would have increased their pay by 50.
changes the visibility of the statusbar in the current window.
you have made changes to this memo, but not yet saved them.
printing line wrapping mode.
generic gateway.
macro entry step.
width of the border around the tab labels.
capture a window or desktop image.
but yesterday 's factory orders report had good news on that front : it said factory inventories fell 0.1  in september the first decline since february 1987.
save file.
englee.
the 7 3/8  term bonds due 2009 are priced at 99 1/2 to yield 7.422  and 7 3/8  term bonds due 2019 are priced at 99 to yield 7.458.
the windows networking workgroup or domain that the user is part of. in order for a new workgroup to fully take effect the user may need to log out and log back in.
unable to write to.
when to show number of items in a folder.
alpha trimmed mean.
similarly, the external factors consisted of the increas e in the rates of foreign exchange and the inflation in indian market etc. 6.
unable to send message.
according to the new classification of industrial products, it is estimated that the production of food products, beverages, textile, tobacco products, shoes, plastic goods, the products of iron and steel based industries have increased during the period under review.
the insurance and financial services concern said profit for the quarter rose 1.1  to $ 93.9 million or $ 1.19 a share compared with $ 92.9 million or $ 1.18 a share the year earlier.
first and foremost, we can start at our very home.
required participants.
new element node.
resolved address to a writable configuration source at position.
considering the development of institutional infrastructures during the past period and also the priority accorded in the allocation of development expenditure to meet theabove objective, the achievements made in the agricultural sector in respect of pro duction and productivity appeared to be far from satisfactory.
thus, there is a great need for additional reforms in spite of the various reforms proposed in this plan period.
time is roughly divided into three parts.
file browser filter mode.
the foreign exchange reserve which stood at an amount equivalent to rs. 11,984.6 million in mid july, 1990, increased to rs. 19,270 million in mid july, 1991.
minimum y.
call.
flac audio.
during the weekend, the family can strengthen their bond by adjourning to clubs for exercise and a healthy meal after that.
poplar bluff.
a survey by the fed 's 12 district banks shows economic growth has been sluggish in recent weeks while upward pressures on prices have moderated.
delete fractal.
simple.
where they disagree is on the subject of u.s. direct investment in japan.
arrow line width.
opendocument drawing output.
vicenza.
no location information available.
currently, there are ongoing discussions about whether to lower the voting age further.
it was our choice to throw the coke cans from our cars.
mrs. yeargin 's extra work was also helping her earn points in the state 's incentive-bonus program.
32 bits.
in winter the air, though could and piercing, is full of smell of flowers and plants, yet it brings freshness to our brain.
when away.
light orange.
warning failed to completely remove old home directory.
mr. hammond worries that old age and the flightiness of youth will diminish the ranks of the east anglian group that keeps the aslacton bells pealing.
size of the board 02  smalllarge, 3custom.
user modes.
manila markets were closed for a holiday.
has default.
an xml string describing the merged ui.
cusp control.
histogram.
in richmond ind. the type f railing is being used to replace arched openings on the g street bridge.
therefore, another principal objective of this plan is to alleviate poverty.
editor font.
failed to stat '.
unmaximize horizontally the window.
online since.
vanuatu.
people's participation undoubtedly deserved a significant role in the decision making process but the periodic plant and the ever decreasing percentage of people's labour contribution in the panchayat sector clearly demonstrated the fact that the so called people's labour contribution was a mandatory obligation imposed on people for the programmes decided upon for them by others.
unable to replace with new configuration file.
reference line.
spacing between step buttons and thumb.
parma.
obey child.
data formatting.
firstly, possession of hand phones distracts students from their studies.
creating properties window.
tripledotted lines are not supported by dia, using doubledotted.
this gave was to increasing poverty problem.
login shell.
striplight.
new tai lue.
list of available encodings.
an index-arbitrage trade is never executed unless there is sufficient difference between the markets in new york and chicago to cover all transaction costs.
items listed as being in short supply numbered only about a dozen but they included one newcomer : milk and milk powder.
science is a glass which needs to be handled with care.
all four areas had higher revenue for the three months ended sept. 30.
only in memory.
ungroup.
optical amplifier.
always open a separate chat window for new chats.
intermediate event  cancel.
split cursor.
i saw the lady crawling on the road towards the wailing child.
priority must be an integer.
unsupported or invalid image height.
automatically adjust to optimal binarization threshold.
for storing local mail in maildir directories.
translated by.
can be used to add a new child to the container.
separately reuter reported that the papua-new guinea government urged its parliament to extend a state of emergency in copper-rich bougainville island for two months.
they fell into oblivion after the 1929 crash.
if not set, each row has the height of the tallest object in it.
block elements.
mandelbrot parameters.
this appointment contains recurrences that evolution cannot edit.
cannot save calendar data malformed uri.
more transparent.
prevent the user from accessing the terminal or specifying a command line to be executed. for example, this would disable access to the panel's "run application" dialog.
copy the texture of the selected paper as a background.
layer fill type.
of spikes.
choose custom color.
help page.
christchurch.
also mr. vargas was barred from association with any nasd member.
this phrase once again is found throughout the many appropriations bills now moving through congress.
language id.
for the attainment of accelerated economic development in the country, industrialization is equally as important as that of agriculture and other primary sectors.
as a result, the planning process lacked accountability and was unable to induce genuine popular participation.
the u.s. chamber of commerce still opposed to any mininum-wage increase said the compromise plan to lift the wage floor 27  in two stages between april 1990 and april 1991  will be impossible for many employers to accommodate and will result in the elimination of jobs for american workers and higher prices for american consumers.
halfinstall.
event source.
neither an adult can get his childhood nor can an old man get his youth back again.
other macro.
however, since these reforms will help achieve stability in the economy, they will facilitate the task of reducing the rate of inflation in the years to come.
assigned.
the need for all white-collar workers to do a nine-to-five job in the office has disappeared.
speech disabled.
that 's almost $ 10 of equity for each columbia share including convertible preferred shares though more junk markdowns would reduce the cushion.
pro-forma balance sheets clearly show why cray research favored the spinoff.
1 mono.
lowest.
close this window.
document ended unexpectedly after the equals sign following an attribute name no attribute value.
allow shrink.
whether list item matching is case sensitive.
so if index arbitrage is simply taking advantage of thin inefficiencies between two markets for the same widget how did  program trading  evolve into the evil creature that is evoking the curses of so many observers ?
projects costing less per hectare and projects requiring minimum government involvement in repair and maintenance,.
arrangements will be made to clearly determine people's participation while implementing any project.
prefix where this application was installed.
checks the spelling of the current document.
lighter.
identifying.
america/elsalvador.
use the color of the image.
while in 1990/91 the balance of payment surplus was rs. 4,781.2 million, the surplus reached rs. 4,306.6 million in the first eleven months of 1991/92.
posterize reduce number of colors.
irákleion.
if government or private watchdogs insist however on introducing greater friction between the markets limits on price moves two-tiered execution higher margin requirements taxation etc. the end loser will be the markets themselves.
the revenue surplus stood at 2.8 percent of gross domestic product at current prices in 1974/75 and 2 percent in 1972/73 at constant prices.
bodrum.
unable to correct dependencies.
gnome libdir.
type a user you permit to contact you.
failed to get value for '.
cataracts refer to a clouding of the eye 's natural lens.
starcalc spreadsheet.
pt.
whether the toolbar item is visible when the toolbar is in a vertical orientation.
strigino.
chemical bank spent more than $ 50 million to introduce its chemplus line several packages aimed at different segments in 1986 according to thomas jacob senior vice president of marketing.
even young children and the recluse respond well to animals rather than their human companions.
green phaseshift.
summary.
you must log in to access domain.
if we have a real bad day the program would say  buy '  he explains.
jamestown.
couldn't open pipe for.
visibility.
error examining.
asia/beirut.
allow plaintext auth over unencrypted streams.
dependency information will not be shown.
test again.
focus on click.
default zoom level used by the icon view.
the file could not be saved as “”.
zoom in.
clickdrag to move the selected pixels.
collapse all.
sleeping comfort cannot be ensured by a formal dress worn for functions.
unsupported version.
other properties.
locally diverted to.
could not close temporary folder.
comma.
change foreground color.
unknown priority.
view the files opened by a process.
suppress operations.
select the object to which the selected clone is linked.
author authors.
list item.
is final.
the image could not be saved.
full of art, architecture and culture, the kathmandu valley is the prime destination for the tourists.
a terminal emulator for the gnome desktop.
therefore, the per capita income has increased marginally and estimated to have reached rs 1754.
speak cell coordinates.
wrap operations.
playlist error.
nevertheless, it cannot be denied that whatever sectors were completed, did contribute to linking the socio-economic activities of the road corridors to the market-oriented economy.
preferences.
seahorse project homepage.
cannot attach cms data object.
getting help with kubuntu.
i would like to go back to 1970.
not only are japan's financial institutions putting their enormous clout to work ; increasingly they're squaring off against one another in unprecedented public fashion.
length.
lightness.
nova scotia.
the vote came after a debate replete with complaints from both proponents and critics of a substantial increase in the wage floor.
new package view.
municipal issues municipal bonds were mostly unchanged to up 1/8 point in light cautious trading prior to tomorrow 's unemployment report.
unmake below.
mark messages as read after.
2.3 electricity : upto 1960, the total generation capacity of electric power in the country was 7.03 mw. out of this, 2.077 mw. was generated from the hydropower stations and 4.953 mw. from the diesel plants.
upgradable packages a newer version of these packages is available.
are you sure you wish to allow to contact you?
the old fashioned idea of teaching was that the children should play a passive part.
inter-tel co. chandler ariz.  jerry chapman managing director of waymar associates was elected a director of this business telecommunications software and systems concern.
sales fell to $ 251.2 million from $ 278.7 million.
â conclusions viewed in the total perspective, in spite of massive investments made in the past, nepal still remains one of the poorest nations of the world.
it has the potential appeal for its audience.
print this document.
resolution.
prevention is better than cure.
outline.
sort by age.
the sec documents describe those chips which are made of gallium arsenide as being so fragile and minute they will require special robotic handling equipment.
fatal parse error in palette file  missing magic header.
unable to remove.
you must log in to access.
whirl angle.
children should avoid eating fast food and junk food.
looking up.
locate.
on tuesday the judge called a news conference to say he was quitting effective dec. 31 to join a san francisco law firm.
garrison.
font stretch set.
because the drought reduced u.s. stockpiles they have more than enough storage space for their new crop and that permits them to wait for prices to rise.
to make the people road conscious, the mass media can play a useful role.
discard changes.
zoom to fit page width in window.
support.
your password will be transmitted unencrypted.
the following signatures couldn't be verified because the public key is not available.
statusbar.
the message's date will be compared against 1200am of the date specified.
paint.
installation options.
variant constructor.
he will continue to report to donald pardus president and chief executive officer.
north point.
add subkey to.
policies will be continued to be effectively implemented so as to induce the domestic and foreign investors to increases their investment with confidence and to generate higher returns as cooperated to the rate of investment.
invalid group.
also a communist official for the first time said the future of the berlin wall could be open to discussion.
maxwell r.d. vos brooklyn n.y.
separator.
set the window icon.
unable to move user to folder in the server side list. error while creating folder.
during the past two years also, the foreign trade deficit has increased and is the previous years.
in early trading in hong kong thursday gold was quoted at $ 374.19 an ounce.
with hundreds of game titles in our online repository, kubuntu allows you to not be all about work, but also allows you to play.
unknown pounce event. please report this!
sleetmute.
configure keyboard shortcuts.
fixed slider size.
self-discipline and the observance of good routines may come easily to some, but not all.
north las vegas.
file not open.
scriptfu brush selection.
relational database.
test.
draw.
la esperanza.
no downloadable files for version  perhaps it is a local or obsolete package?
mauritania.
failed to read from child process.
in response to the ruling gilt futures swiftly plunged more than a point yesterday before *-1 recovering much of the loss by the end of the session.
applying canvas.
tulcea.
dashdotdot.
generic factory 'new' moniker.
tile bumpmap.
finished loading.
delete member ?
federal data corp. got a $ 29.4 million air force contract for intelligence data handling.
variable width.
unable to open.
dialog frontend requires a screen at least 13 lines tall and 31 columns wide.
economic growth appears to be leveling off latest reports suggest.
there is no field in human life without an impact of science.
/sort diagrams/default/by name.
neon detection.
wilkesbarre.
canadian.
close curve on completion.
prompt the user when he or she tries to send a message without a subject.
pans the braille display to the right.
warning you cannot set a default value for a schema.
remove the threes.
alabama.
the file that you dropped is not local.
test sound.
but  the concept is workable you sell the good bank as an ongoing operation and use some of the proceeds to capitalize the bad bank  says thrift specialist lewis ranieri of ranieri associates in new york.
escanaba.
possible actions.
modifications had been made to the souper combo product at the time the issue was printed he says making it less an offender than was portrayed.
could not check mail file.
weak entity.
click to blur.
unlink clone.
same type.
one an average, the item deposits increased by 24.7 percent per annum and the incre ased in net capital and other liabilities was 35.2 percent.
the hearing range of animals is much wider than that of humans.
date modified.
play a sound when a contact logs out.
you are about to save a channel saved selection asthis will not save the visible layers.
with the limit in effect members would be able to execute trades at the limit price or at higher prices but not below it.
web page themes.
bank of new england 's shares are traded on the new york stock exchange.
this will find keys for others on the internet. these keys can then be imported into your local key ring.
mr. driscoll did n't elaborate about who the potential partners were or when the talks were held.
remove optimization to make editing easier.
groupwise work screen name 3.
but the two legal experts responding to an inquiry by sen. edward kennedy d. mass. wrote in a joint letter that the president  lacks the constitutional authority to exercise a line-item veto.
unknown window information request.
resize.
trace image has no bitmap data.
grid line color.
theme file name.
in a leveraged buy-out a small group of investors acquires a company in a transaction financed largely by borrowing with the expectation that the debt will be paid with funds generated by the acquired company 's operations or sales of its assets.
dialogs are hidden in taskbar.
document selected to cursor position.
size changes will not be shown.
character reference did not end with a semicolon most likely you used an ampersand character without intending to start an entity  escape ampersand as.
plugin needs an alpha channel.
headphones.
create or edit rules for filtering new mail.
but like mr. egnuss few expect it to be halted entirely and a surprising number doubt it should be.
border.
the game file to use.
casper.
unable to mount the volume. if this is an encrypted drive, then the wrong password or key was used.
scott taccetta a chicago accountant is going into money-market funds.
just the thing for the vivaldi-at-brunch set the yuppie audience that has embraced new age as its very own easy listening.
drug companies in the key index also notched gains as market-makers searched for stock in anticipation of demand due to the sector 's defensive qualities.
it would contradict that objective if the appropriations clause technically a limitation on legislative power could be read as placing the president on congress 's short leash making the executive consist of the president and every member of congress.
error while saving song information.
contents background color.
to that end american express has been signing up gasoline companies car repair shops tire companies and car dealers to accept the card.
could not update object.
public.
the folder could not be created.
groupwise home screen name 1.
but the government 's action which caught jaguar management flat-footed may scuttle the gm minority deal by forcing it to fight for all of jaguar.
the newest breed also called  rocket scientists  because of their backgrounds in physics and mathematics devise the complex hedging and trading strategies that are popularly known as program trading.
this event has been deleted.
status text.
he adds that his shares in a company savings plan are invested in a mutual fund and volatility on a given day may hurt the fund.
control magnitude.
squall.
undelete the selected messages.
the resource is locked.
high school is a critical time in the life of young people.
duplicate node.
unable to ban user.
cathryn rice could hardly believe her eyes.
y pad.
you cannot subscribe to this newsgroup no such newsgroup. the selected item is a probably a parent folder.
please drag just one image to set a custom icon.
nevada.
thus, the debt obligations increased from 2.0 percent in 1972/73 to 42.9 percent of gross domestic product in 1989/90. due to the expansionary fiscal policies adopted during this period, the gross expenditure recorded and average annual growth rate of approximately 17 percent from fiscal years 1964/65 to 1989/90.
it is also a human trade which is illegal throughout the world.
end date.
not all those who wrote oppose the changes.
deleting files from archive.
the hue of the region determines the size of the stroke.
a survey by the federal reserve 's 12 district banks and the latest report by the national association of purchasing management blurred that picture of the economy.
but this is not a sign of good citizen ship.
yet rain depends on trees and foliage which cause clouds to precipitate.
children should also be taught to trust their instincts and seek help whenever they feel threatened.
one of the most rewarding things of an evening walk is the sight of a beautiful sunset.
unable to unmount the selected volume. the volume is in use by one or more programs.
complete.
quelimane.
thirdly, it does not help in the analysis of programmes and alternative policies, and in the assessment and formulation of these programmes and policies in the perspective of attaining total objective the techniques of macromodel have been employed in the formulation of the eighth plan.
current locale.
bottomright.
association, two classes are associated.
unrecognized.
image properties.
similarly, the trade deficit with india has increased on account of the increased import of manufactured items from india in comparison to the export of traditional agro -based and unprocessed products to that country.
to achieve the above mentioned objective, this plan has called for the involvement of private sector and increased people's participation at the community level.
all key files.
video format.
the august gdp was up 2.4  from its year-earlier level.
scheme source code.
the league is the brainchild of colorado real estate developer james morley once a minor-leaguer himself who says he had the idea last january while lying on a beach in australia.
unused.
sensitivity for brightness component.
the first two gaf trials ended in mistrials earlier this year.
missing files.
you cannot remove a folder in a news store unsubscribe instead.
if you proceed, the account information will be deleted permanently.
python sample plugin.
moreover they said the first appropriations bill passed 200 years ago covered many different items and there was no discussion of a line-item veto.
little by little there is progress  says the miti official.
spread amount.
valdosta.
installed software.
monetary and credit situation money supply increased at an average annual rate of 15.6 percent during the period from june/july 1962 to june/july 1990.
stavropol'.
chincoteague.
progress bar.
a lot of the stocks that have been under water finally saw a reason to uptick  said george jennison head trader of banking issues in shearson lehman hutton 's otc department.
close the current file.
default mixer device.
n.v.dsm said net income in the third quarter jumped 63  as the company had substantially lower extraordinary charges to account for a restructuring program.
copyright copyrights.
specified management expenses will be made available to be implemented in order solicit increased participation of the semigovernmental organisation, the nongovernmental association/ organisation and the private agency.
tuesday.
customize.
error saving file.
three card deals.
open preferences for the gradient tool.
brought to you by.
whether to disable the plugins in the user's home directory.
file as.
really continue.
line  can't update password.
are deleted.
internal error, installpackages was called with broken packages!
there are no files to write to disc.
powersaved 'set' output variable.
like virtually everything on wall street the program-trading battle is over money and the traditionalists have been losing out on bundles of it to the new guard in recent years.
red phaseshift.
unset paint make it undefined so it can be inherited.
it has no bearing on our work force today.
screen on display already has a window manager.
software development.
copy email address.
the user has denied your request to add them to your buddy list for the following reason.
radius.
winslow.
the board width must be a positive integer.
deal a card from the deck.
failed to delete old file '.
slave only allowed with install.
and the usia said that all of us could take extensive notes.
he owns about 45,000 shares of campbell stock and has options to buy more than 100,000 additional shares.
some of the functions whose initiation was attempted at conceptual and operational levels by the elected demarcation government in 1959 for fundamental changes in economic structure were given political colour and introduced as fundamental economic reform movements.
matters are different in underdeveloped countries which are hot, dry and barren.
strain.
selinsgrove.
create histogram.
international falls.
car type.
click to dodge the line.
zoom  resize behavior.
but  it wo n't lead to imminent use  of new superconductors cautioned robert b. van dover one of the at&t researchers.
mhformat mail directories.
standard font.
the default comment is limited to characters.
the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks.
some files failed to download.
argentina said it will ask creditor banks to halve its foreign debt of $ 64 billion the third-highest in the developing world.
moving requires old and new length to be the same.
unknown arrow type.
number.
in the soil conservation and watershed management sector, 29 gulley control, 24 landslide control, terrace-rehabilitation work in 92 hectares and protection of 43 water sources were accomplished and 283 tons pf medicinal herbs were processed.
bob has an agenda and this seemed like the natural time.
complete.
if the tooltips of the toolbar should be active or not.
cotulla.
wall street reacted favorably to mr. mcgovern 's departure and its implications.
path to file.
thus communication is important to maintain a good and healthy relationship with the various stakeholders of an organization.
treemodelsort model.
the babelists of the united nations are experts at obfuscation.
contact the system administrator.
after the delay, the screenshot is taken.
spencer.
background type.
font weight.
alternate the sign of shifts for each row.
this certificate is not viewable.
stream monikerextender.
the nation 's largest steelmaker earned $ 175 million or 62 cents a share compared with the year-earlier $ 228 million or 80 cents a share.
bend the image using two control curves.
ignore page margins.
lightness.
show one month.
human force.
transforming.
columns on each layer.
the three year plan a significant result of the first plan was the recognition of the conditions required for successful planning and project implementation.
back in 1975 late in the season a then-21 mr. gideon made his only major league appearance five and two-thirds innings for the texas rangers against the chicago white sox.
preview once.
remove link.
the needham mass. concern tracks investments in new businesses.
europe/budapest.
show internal processing information.
reset view to defaults.
budgetary deficit, monetary and structural variables of the economy cause monetary expansion and price determination.
spell check inline.
all images.
command exited abnormally.
in  out.
package listed more than once, only processing once.
prime.
new game.
incorrect password for.
fosston.
installed.
human development is a concept within a field of international development.
therefore, the extent if requisite investment of the plan was fixed on the basis of crude incremental capital output ratios.
the version of the program.
photograph collecting gains new stature as prices rise.
for many, nepal’s greatest attraction is its people.
changes aspect of fractal.
caution.
latacunga.
if true, the child can be made smaller than its requisition.
julia.
about $ 490 million of that would be allocated to the buy-back leaving about $ 130 million he said.
she just never gave it up  says mary marchand mary beth 's mother.
choose photo to add to key.
no such folder.
output channel.
configure configure a chat room.
whether to display the right margin.
under that law parties proposing mergers or acquisitions valued at $ 15 million or more must notify ftc and justice department antitrust regulators before completing the transactions.
misc ops.
directory pane.
then just as the tramp is given a blind girl to cure in  city lights  the artist is put in charge of returning a two-year-old waif nicole alysia whose father has been murdered by thugs to her mother.
password has expired.
suffolk.
whether this tag affects the font style.
erwin tomash the 67-year-old founder of this maker of data communications products and a former chairman and chief executive resigned as a director.
dresden.
western sahara.
in 1960/61, this corporation had initiated its service with 6 aeroplanes.
you don't have the right permissions to extract archives in the folder.
file open behaviour.
brownsville.
button right.
access server.
delete.
paused.
check your internet connection.
during 1963-64, the second year of the second plan, whether conditions adversely affected agricultural output.
couldn't retrieve keys from server.
width mismatch!
remove the bookmark.
@ money market deposits-a 6.21  a - average rate paid yesterday by 100 large banks and thrifts in the 10 largest metropolitan areas as compiled by bank rate monitor.
playlist already exists.
show menubar by default in new terminals.
show guides.
lower selected object to bottom.
duncan.
use the system fixed width font.
default charset in which to compose messages.
even if there is consumer resistance at first a wine that wins high ratings from the critics will eventually move.
dilate.
weblog url.
cannot create cms message.
resolver state successfully written!
expects an array result.
take a picture of the screen.
select multiple.
help options.
include the window border.
the sick government undertakings will has to be gradually handed over to the private sector.
out of this figure, it was in 1990/91 alone that the drinking water facility was provided to 482,899 people.
that compares with operating earnings of $ 132.9 million or 49 cents a share the year earlier.
rurrenabaque.
fees 1 7/8.
bandare lengeh.
unable to parse pattern at.
move window to workspace 3.
but is installed.
after adjusting for inflation the commerce department said construction spending did n't change in september.
another person close to the talks said  it is very hard to justify paying a silly price for jaguar if an out-and-out bidding war were to start now.
north bay.
the nepali capital kathmandu was forced into a gridlock for two continuous days this week.
this is a type of greenhouse effect.
continue.
evolution pine importer.
treasury bills : results of the monday october 30 1989 auction of short-term u.s. government bills sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.78  13 weeks ; 7.62  26 weeks.
silver bay.
saudi arabia.
couldn't rename key.
in recent months mr. dorrance 's children and other family members have pushed for improved profitability and higher returns on their equity.
ponta porã.
development is not merely a mechanical function of capital and technology but it is also a social and political process of mobilizing and organizing people commensurate with the desired goals.
stepper size.
multifabric server switch.
the text for the table caption.
each 50,000 swiss franc note is convertible from dec. 5 1989 to dec. 31 1993 at a 5  premium over the closing share price tuesday when terms are scheduled to be fixed.
a folder with that name already exists.
but the heated fight over program trading is about much more than a volatile stock market.
move to calendar.
but other sectors failed to attract investor interest and remained sluggish making overall trading appear mixed.
add access requirer.
snap edge set.
changing the user information for.
number of accessible hypertext links.
volume.
vertical alignment.
error deleting file.
inverted exclamation point.
/conversation/get info.
required people.
number of frames.
not supported by host.
use the unknown flag.
error opening conffiles file.
nes rom.
botswana.
rayong.
necessary infrastructure will be built for the development of rural irrigation, drinking water, electricity,communications, rural industries and tourism etc. providing the basic facilities of life such as suspension bridges, schools and health care, the environment in the villages will be made comfortably in the rural areas.
transmittal tape.
space.
if president bush loses at the court it might be disappointing as morrison v. olson was for the reagan administration.
paragraph.
always blind carboncopy bcc to.
the california justices noted that the fear of litigation already forced the only remaining anti-morning-sickness drug bendectin off the u.s. market.
unminimize all.
obsoletes.
contact list editor.
msn home screen name 2.
plugin browser.
pisco.
show or hide the toolbar.
laramie.
examine solution.
europe/chisinau.
no description.
filename.
for example there are options on the s&p 500 futures contract and on the s&p 100 index.
cameroon.
only this week it was announced that mitsubishi estate co. had acquired a 51  stake in rockefeller group which owns new york 's prestigious rockefeller center.
superseded.
gnome app datadir.
as such industrialists are more concerned with investing for short term personal gains rather than for long germ national economy.
release mouse to set color.
peterborough.
we did n't have much of a choice  cray computer 's chief financial officer gregory barnum said in an interview.
east  northeast.
loop forever.
recorded info about from.
new jersey.
bottomleft.
change boot disk.
lock thresholds.
by educating people, they learn to be efficient and creative.
don't attach connectors to text objects.
could not bind a socket.
go to next photo.
doctors are using the plane to rush to distant places to save the lives of their patients.
palettes directory  is unavailable.
multicast information.
is broken or not fully installed.
unable to cd to.
could not create file probably because it already exists.
forward the selected message quoted like a reply.
whether foreground color is set.
initial color of tiled clones.
foodgrain production which stood at 3.152 million metric tones in 1961/62 reached only 5.698 million metric tones in 1989/90 with an average growth rate of 2.1 percent per annum only.
in thailand for example the government 's board of investment approved $ 705.6 million of japanese investment in 1988 10 times the u.s. investment figure for the year.
quit rhythmbox.
pieces.
gimp text editor.
move tab right.
log report.
make the window visible on the current workspace only.
carlisle.
url of internet radio station.
none.
the bush administration has threatened to veto such a bill because of what it views as an undesirable intrusion into the affairs of industry but the 300-113 vote suggests that supporters have the potential 0 to override a veto.
the herald joins the baltimore news-american which folded and the boston herald-american which was sold as cornerstones of the old hearst newspaper empire abandoned by the company in the 1980s.
sybase dataserver.
new channel color.
the six of diamonds.
month view vertical pane position.
informational message.
failed to remove.
error.
time response.
rename.
intensity of original color when lit by a light source.
cursor up.
lihue.
replicate.
such devices have boosted japanese investment in mortgage-backed securities to more than 1  of the $ 900 billion in such instruments outstanding and their purchases are growing at a rapid rate.
whether the application will paint directly on the widget.
monitor resolution.
speculation about a takeover fight has sent jaguar shares soaring in the past six weeks.
it was indeed a prerequisite for rural development.
whether the label text can be selected with the mouse.
there are few attachments getting downloaded. sending the mail will cause the mail to be sent without those pending attachments.
the estimated sectoral allocation of investment is based on a detailed analysis of existing and potential capit al productivity in eight major sectors of economy.
threshold tool reduce image to two colors using a threshold.
buginese.
montedison currently owns about 72  of erbamont 's common shares outstanding.
create spiral.
total investment requirement for the plan period and sectoral allocation of resources: as mentioned above, the size of total investment and its sectoral allocation patterns, growth in productivity, the control in government expenditure and the policies encouraging the diversion of private sector savings to productive sectors will contribute to the attainment of a 5.1 percent economic growth rate.
add nodes.
javascript.
use the same fonts as other applications.
grab the current window.
you must log in to access domain.
column header.
asia/tashkent.
all this shows in the behaviour of each child.
value invert.
similarly, the current account deficit will also be reduced from 9.6 percent of gross domestic product in 1991/92 to 8.0 percent in 1996/97.
appearance.
copyright information for the program.
deregulation has effectively removed all restrictions on what banks can pay for deposits as well as opened up the field for new products such as high-rate cds.
make plan and mould it in the present time.
please, make sure you have permissions to write to.
quincy.
pause.
are you sure you want to delete this memo?
specifies the visual style of the bar in percentage mode deprecated.
in talks with mr. nixon chinese leaders expressed no regret for the killings and even suggested that the u.s. was prominently involved in the demonstrations this spring.
it was in jaguar 's best interests  for the company 's future to be assured and the present climate of uncertainty resolved as quickly as possible  mr. ridley said.
maximize all.
saturation.
total investment is fixed by the extent of external and internal savings, and thus in turn, by the supply of investment resources too.
include the window border with the screenshot.
climatological conditions vary across different parts of the country due to the country's physiographic.
is less than.
but say mr. dinkins 's managers he did have an office and his organization did have members.
olive oil is produced from the olive tree.
make transparent.
open a file.
the speed with which such program trades take place and the volatile price movements they can cause are what program trading critics profess to despise.
to keep packages in their current state without placing them on hold.
despite this, some significant results were achieved, although expenditures were only rs 210 millions or rs.
but it is mr. lane as movie director producer and writer who has been obsessed with refitting chaplin 's little tramp in a contemporary way.
used for converting to lossy voicequality audio. use this for recording speech that doesn't need to be edited.
web server.
could not create peruser dia config directory. please make sure that the environment variable home points to an existing directory.
egypt.
zell am see.
the nineteenth the twentieth century transport systems will be inadequate in the twenty-first century.
whether words are wrapped at widget edges.
max size.
merced.
in september the custom-chip maker said excess capacity and lagging billings would result in an estimated $ 2 million to $ 3 million net loss for the third quarter.
under these trying conditions, too, the great expectations and enthusiasm obtaining among the people can serve as a primary source of energy for the process of economic modernization.
white plains.
the unavailability of federal funds and the climate in which the decision was made certainly do n't provide any incentive for one of the more visible foundations to provide support  he said.
more colors.
brightness.
no more lists.
animate.
as it stands now congress presumes after the reagan administration that the white house will take unconstitutional provisions in appropriations bills lying down.
although when he is not at home, he is working for the benefit of his children.
incorrect data type.
the supplied credentials were not valid for context initiation, or the credential handle did not reference any credentials.
the signature of this message cannot be verified, it may have been altered in transit.
font size.
mailstop.
we would like to apologize for having caused huge trouble  fujitsu president takuma yamamoto read from a prepared statement as he stood before a packed news conference at his company 's downtown headquarters.
fit to.
if you delete an item, it will be permanently lost.
document history.
japan 's commitment in southeast asia also includes steep increases in foreign assistance and trade.
open with.
under the measure passed yesterday the minimum wage would rise to $ 3.80 next april.
ms video.
follow up.
this message is not signed. there is no guarantee that this message is authentic.
annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns.
suspend.
it is always good and well groomed to see good subjects on cinema.
every time evolution starts, check whether or not it is the default mailer.
retry.
apply filters to new messages in inbox on this server.
many of them recently have been spending a lot of money on public relations and advertising to improve their images but they should realize that the most important thing is real change not changing people 's perceptions.
perl plugin loader.
it is natural for him to put his best foot forward.
the text to go into each cell.
leeuwarden.
we are now always ahead of time.
backup file.
combobox model.
close this folder.
radio waves.
reverting from.
clickdrag to move the anchor around.
close the current window.
user dictionary.
save file as.
part of package filed still want.
background color.
toggles the silencing of speech.
gross domestic product: a revised estimate indicates that the per capita income in 1990/91 reached rs. 1736 (at 1974/75 constant prices).
cape parry.
free.
manaus.
repeat.
ramstein.
development strategies which broaden the base of agricultural development also promote accelerated growth in other areas.
on the assumption that the rate of population growth will be 2.1 percent during the plan period, the above economic growth rate will result in a three fold increase over previous percapita growth rates or a three percent annual growth in per capital income.
but analysts said early results from the reorganization have been disappointing especially in europe and there were signs that the board became impatient.
but its purchases apparently were delayed by a reorganization of its agricultural bureaucracy as well as budget problems.
there is enough natural resources available for the smooth development and the progress of the country.
preferred mobility assistive technology application.
redo move.
invalid listtype on.
mr. bodner declines to comment on the arrangement.
empathy.
they are still trying to lure back small investors spooked by the 1987 stock-market crash and the market 's swings since then.
storage is not empty.
page breaks.
but gm officials said they too were surprised by the move which left them to  consider all our options and explore matters further.
a custom font that will be used for the editing area. this will only take effect if the "use default font" option is turned off.
automatic orientation.
europe/vienna.
in the seventh plan the amount of total investment stood at rs. 103, 014 million at 1991/92 prices.
the three of clubs.
command line.
model column used to retrieve the text from.
the screen where this window will be displayed.
as efforts aimed at raising the economic growth rate do not necessarily benefit the poor to a significant extent, special programmes will be undertaken for poverty alleviation at village level and household level.
in london at mid-afternoon yesterday ratners 's shares were up 2 pence 1.26 cents at 260 pence $ 1.64.
this argument is perhaps the most interesting one for abolishing program trading not because of its merits but because of the firms championing the cause.
save the tool options when gimp exits.
coordinate expression had unknown variable or constant.
mount wilson.
float.
zoom in.
hence, there appeared to be a lack of continuity and long-term analysis in the process of selection and identification of goals.
although traders rushed to buy futures contracts many remained skeptical about the brazilian development which could n't be confirmed analysts said.
you have certificates on file that identify these certificate authorities.
wrap mode.
thus, though electricity generation and distribution was increased, the burden arising from the excessive per unit cost of electricity due to completed projects being very expensive fell upon the consumers.
the column of the model containing the strings.
they succeed daniel m. rexinger retired circuit city executive vice president and robert r. glauber u.s. treasury undersecretary on the 12-member board.
busy.
hold.
program traders '  power to create total panic is so great that they ca n't be allowed to have their way  says rep. edward markey a massachusetts democrat.
the share of revenue surplus on gross domestic product remained at current prices at 3.0 percent in 1990/91 and 2.8 percent in 1991/92.
document ended unexpectedly inside an elementopening tag.
data center switch reversed.
waiting for response.
colormap.
a provision to offer a capital of rs. 7,000 was made to make the bio-gas plants accessible to rural families.
the user is either offline or you are blocked.
unknown id in regex.
resolving server address.
this is a great gain to the human society.
so he always tries to present himself in the most attractive dress appropriate to an occasion.
delay before the submenus of a menu bar appear.
enable esd.
getting cookie.
light 4.
browse packages by category.
modify the file's properties.
sample average.
live video.
the issue could be relaunched possibly in a restructured form as early as next week according to the lead underwriter.
there are similar messages.
whether this tag affects background height.
open appointment.
tags.
in the steel division operating profit dropped 11  to $ 85 million.
create the initial window with the given geometry.
for constrained angles.
failed to create pipes.
invalid proxy settings.
barred by its budget law from making any new domestic bond issues wellington's debt management office had been casting abroad to raise the 3 billion new zealand dollars -lrb- us$ 1.76 billion -rrb- to nz$ 4 billion it needs to come up with by the end of its fiscal year next june 30.
purify.
while there was an investment of about rs. 1,723.4 million in cottage and small industries registered within the first nine months of f.y. 1990/91, it was estimated the in f.y. 1991/92 there would be an investment of about rs. 1,801.4 millions on 4708 industries registering within the first nine months.
show more details.
during the same period the productivity of food crops declined by 1.5 percent.
there appeared there significant trends in forging assistance during this period.
? bytes.
even those industries which had begun their operation could not flourish for not being able to acquire self reliance.
the sale represents 10.2  of meridian 's shares outstanding.
reference to remote file.
set private channel.
a graphical tool to analyze disk usage.
authentication.
drag to create a rectangle. drag controls to round corners and resize. click to select.
add alpha channel.
they point out that these institutions want to lock in returns on high-yield u.s. treasury debt and suggest demand for the u.s. unit will continue unabated until rates in the u.s. recede.
image types.
sample colorize.
undo.
the first and second issues sold out on newsstands she says and the magazine has orders for 93,000 subscriptions.
marching ants speed.
must specify one or more directories to get key/value pairs from.
the cash value is determined by multiplying the index number by a specified amount.
show or hide all open dialogs.
under a 1934 law the johnson debt default act as amended it 's illegal for americans to extend credit to countries in default to the u.s. government unless they are members of the world bank and international monetary fund.
it was estimated that irrigation facility was available to about 21 percent of the cultivated land by 1989/90 with the availability of additional irrigation facility to a total of 539,039 ha. of land during the panchayat regime as a result of heavy investment in the irrigation sector during this period.
sort order.
normalise.
current translators.
display notification.
shut down.
francistown.
ear and sound (or noise) has a direct relationship.
unmount the selected volume.
terminal.
that can be a trap for unwary investors says richard bernstein senior quantitative analyst at merrill lynch & co.
victor stanley fishman longwood fla. fined $ 25,000 ; william harold floyd houston $ 100,000 ; michael anthony houston bronx n.y. $ 15,000 ; amin jalaalwalikraam glenham n.y. $ 60,000 ; richard f. knapp london $ 10,000 and 30-day suspension ; deborah renee martin st. louis $ 15,000 ; joseph francis muscolina jr. palisades park n.j. $ 15,000 ; robert c. najarian brooklyn park minn. $ 15,000 ; edward robert norwick nesconset n.y. $ 30,000.
mr. courter 's long nose shrinks while mr. florio 's grows.
mr. tomash will remain as a director emeritus.
chartres.
the share of food products and raw materials in total import was 30.9 percent in f.y. 1990/91, which increased slightly to 3.6 perc ent in f.y 1991/92.
it said that the  temptation for managements to ease this profit pressure by taking greater risks is an additional rating factor.
detach from server.
opening frame.
debian package.
vertical bar.
it is an established fact that urbanization is always accompanied with industrialization or vice versa.
south african troops were placed on alert.
virtual memory.
some packages were broken and have been fixed.
could not be found in the path.
dataprocessing equipment active.
australia/adelaide.
western culture can also corrupt a person morally especially young people.
hamadan.
whether this tag affects text editability.
michelin officials could n't immediately comment on the referral but they noted the purchase from btr has already been concluded.
monitors won't give you vitamin d  but sunlight will.
holland.
encouragement will be given for the operation of government constructed project s commanding over 2,000 ha in the terai and 500 ha in the hills under the joint management of the responsible government agency and the users' committee.
module1,module2,.
this is not necessarily so in the animal world.
remove from the list of active controllers.
the company is doing well it 's stable it 's got good people.
he said he was giving up the golden share  to clear the way so the playing field is level between all contestants.
headers clickable.
disable crash dialog.
america/barbados.
indicate.
the reliance of the growing labour force on agricultural pursuit where labour productivity was already low led to a further decline in per capita production in agriculture.
reached rs. 15026.8 million in 1991.
special case.
saltillo.
normally closed contact horizontal.
biometric reader.
carroll.
role.
' field, missing package name, or garbage where package name expected.
cannot add cms signer information.
the url is not valid, please check it.
font family set.
rotate.
the food and drug administration allowed the company to begin marketing a new lens for use in cataract patients.
however, the present population of the country is already placing excessive demands on existing resources.
he can do many things in this stage.
oversample.
try again.
separately statistics canada reported that its industrial-product price index dropped 0.2  in september its third consecutive monthly decline.
cancel any action on the selected package.
the development of the cottage industry could not be oriented towards a correct direction in the past while rs. 9.6 million was invested in 1974/75 following the registration of 70 cottage and small industries, a sum of rs. 828.6 million was invested in 1989/90 with the registration of 932 cottage and small industries.
depending upon how many warrants and options are exercised prior to completion of the transaction heritage would issue between 1.8 million and 2.35 million preferred shares a heritage spokesman estimated.
/sort objects/default.
the plan will make all possible efforts in this regard.
aegean numbers.
unknown font type.
at least one attendee is required.
brisk domestic demand due to increasing capital investment pushed up sales sharply in construction and industrial machinery divisions.
select pixels by.
these growth rates were insufficient to cope with the increasing development expenditure.
unable to find help paths orplease check your installation.
the internal air service has been operated by royal nepal airlines corporation.
task list properties.
send messages to console instead of using a dialog.
moves flat review to the home position.
other works also have been exceeding price estimates.
it signals congress 's attempt under the pretext of guarding the public purse to deny the president the funding necessary to execute certain of his duties and prerogatives specified in article ii of the constitution.
the wide disparity in economic and social facilities between the rural and urban areas has led to unprecedented increase in migration to urban areas.
in the price situation, the problems of high price rise has not only reduced the competit ive capacity of the economy but also caused greas sufferings to the people.
mr. baum a seasoned marketer who is said to have a good rapport with campbell employees will have responsibility for all domestic operations except the pepperidge farm unit.
do you make sweatshirts or sparkplugs ?
saving images.
this name can be set if you want a custom name for the trash icon on the desktop.
internal error, failed to create.
show binary.
magnetic storage.
defaults.
requested action not taken mailbox name not allowed.
invalid zerolength sorting policy name.
let the value brightness of the region determine the direction of the stroke.
unsupported encoding.
a steady deposit base.
it doesn't replace pitching in the majors but it proves to me that i would have been able to play if i'd stayed healthy  he says.
masjed soleyman.
the two partners merely had to falsify the true ownership of the corporation.
evolution elm importer.
keyboard modifiers.
the files have been updated.
the chicago mercantile exchange said it plans to institute an additional  circuit breaker  aimed at stemming market slides.
valley federal savings & loan association took an $ 89.9 million charge as it reported a third-quarter loss of $ 70.7 million or $ 12.09 a share.
create or alter units used in gimp.
home icon visible on desktop.
third oil prices have n't declined although supply has been increasing.
blinds.
radial gradient focus.
when the stock market dropped nearly 7  oct. 13 for instance the mexico fund plunged about 18  and the spain fund fell 16.
twin falls.
though legal frameworks were constituted for conservation, promotion and utiliisation of forest during this period, forest protection could not be undertaken in an effective manner due to weak and inefficient implementation.
this led to the establishement of a tradition of adopting a new goal prior to the accomplishment of a previous one.
zweibrücken.
role field.
treasury bills : results of the monday october 30 1989 auction of short-term u.s. government bills sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.78  13 weeks ; 7.62  26 weeks.
dependency for cannot be satisfied because the package cannot be found.
enter the passphrase for your new key twice.
space which is inserted between grid rows.
therefore, in order to achieve some concrete growth in agricultural production and productivity, it is essential to make optimum utilization of the irrigation facilities through their suithable renovation, maintenance and operation, and to establish convenient and reliable systems for the distribution of improved seeds and chemical fertilizers, the dissemination of appropriate technology and th e disbursement of agricultural loans.
server for remote scriptfu operation.
the first champagne to crack that price barrier was the 1979 salon de mesnil blanc de blancs.
then, with the print media, information knowledge achieved a broader reach.
alice springs.
santa cruz.
midmorning he dons an orange-and-blue uniform and for fun may field a bunt from dave kingman.
display a second backward arrow button on the opposite end of the scrollbar.
donate.
region affected by plugin is empty.
magna recently cut its quarterly dividend in half and the company 's class a shares are wallowing far below their 52-week high of 16.125 canadian dollars us$ 13.73.
spouse.
still  how sweet it is  he says savoring the fat sound of the well-hit line drive that bounces off the center field wall.
vertical gradient.
it was censorship.
open options.
the public is buying the market when in reality there is plenty of grain to be shipped  said bill biedermann allendale inc. research director.
the yield on six-month treasury bills sold at monday 's auction for example rose to 8.04  from 7.90.
sales rose 10  to $ 13.8 billion from $ 12.5 billion.
they do at least come around to saying that the courts might want to end  rigid affirmative action programs.
draft.
show side pane in new windows.
buddy list window transparency.
substantial foreign exchange was earned from the tourist sector during the period from 1961/62 to 1989/90.
audio cd recorder.
revert to a saved version of the file.
search was not specific enough. server found too many keys.
keeping the mood light the two then chanted and chortled their way through some murderous polyrhythms devised by mr. douglas as an alternative to hindemith 's dry theory-teaching techniques and then with mr. gomez soared and improvised on the composer 's tight  bebop etudes.
a gdkimage to display.
special token.
width of scrollbar or scale thumb.
create search folder from search.
warning level.
pgp message.
clones.
wheeling.
country funds offer an easy way to get a taste of foreign stocks without the hard research of seeking out individual companies.
mount carmel.
obesity is not merely a cosmetic problem that denies you the pleasure of looking smart and fit.
skip forward.
resize.
gujarati.
calculating file size.
device.
special effects that nobody understands.
doublets.
variation.
action area border.
fit height to images.
diagrams and charts clarify many subjects like anatomy, science or chemistry.
number of pixels to put inside the wrap.
when it 's time for their biannual powwow the nation 's manufacturing titans typically jet off to the sunny confines of resort towns like boca raton and hot springs.
replaces.
the bitmap ends unexpectedly.
comment.
department officials say that hhs secretary louis sullivan will support dr. mason 's ruling which will be issued soon in the form of a letter to the acting director of the national institutes of health.
são pedro da aldeia.
the morbidity rate is a striking finding among those of us who study asbestos-related diseases  said dr. talcott.
amount of blue light in the color.
the business had been handled by vansant dugdale baltimore.
use underline.
telecommuter house subdued.
color of guidelines.
unset.
a table to view and select the current time range.
default outside spacing.
new address book.
seattle.
artist.
rotation.
hammacher schlemmer & co. offers a fiber-optic christmas tree that eliminates the need to string lights.
threshold.
another otc bank stock involved in a buy-out deal first constitution financial was higher.
panamá.
these, in turn, have given rise to different types of customs and traditions in the country.
in anticipation of the start-up of its new factory the company said a larger-than-normal chassis supply has been built to carry it through the transition period.
retrieval failed.
this message is encrypted, but with a weak encryption algorithm. it would be difficult, but not impossible for an outsider to view the content of this message in a practical amount of time.
minute the workday starts on, 0 to 59.
uppercase.
value spacing.
window title goes here.
disc number.
telephone number.
the president could probably not avoid this restriction by choosing people willing to serve without pay because the anti-deficiency act prohibits voluntary service to the government.
has status.
yahoo! profile.
cannot join channel.
he means the rule that a player can't cut it after a certain age.
microsoft word document.
contact quickadd.
the american bar association 's house of delegates passed a resolution in 1985 condemning the irs reporting requirement.
join favorites.
keyboard shortcut to copy text.
mr. newhouse meanwhile insisted that he is n't unhappy with mr. bernstein or the performance of random house the largest trade publishing house in the u.s.
consequently, the gap between revenue and expenditure reached as high as 12 percent from 3 percent.
display warning dialog.
primary dns.
input methods.
the modeling technique will make it possible to assess the prevailing or the likely negative influence on the economy of low productivity, supply and structural constraints, lack of prudence in the allocation and utilization of resources and the unnecessary government interfence in various economic sectors.
the cases quickly went to court but the mothers of several thousand des plaintiffs could n't recall whose brand they used.
decorated.
i'm not so young anymore  concedes the cigar-chomping 48-year-old mr. tiant.
another copy.
palmdale.
the offset can be adjusted by dragging the preview using the middle mouse button.
a review of the situation shows that the road available all over the kingdom in 1960/61 was 1198 km., out of which 339km. was metalled and 859 km. fair weather road.
make the window quit fullscreen mode.
the theme that is used to display the conversation in chat windows.
view a list of frequently asked questions.
storage router.
user defined.
could not get details for user.
not sorted.
apostrophe.
delete selection.
abstract.
use normal distribution.
objects and filters internal to dia.
update attendee status.
mr. einhorn of goldman sachs estimates the stock market will deliver a 12  to 15  total return from appreciation and dividends over the next 12 months vs. a  cash rate of return  of perhaps 7  or 8  if dividend growth is weak.
flip segment.
the lorillard spokeswoman said asbestos was used in  very modest amounts  in making paper for the filters in the early 1950s and replaced with a different type of filter in 1956.
software center.
create.
version of on system is.
they should be encouraged to learn about other religions, their principles and commandments.
authenticating connection.
send message.
kill process.
new categorical browser.
it should provide useful social experiences.
search titles.
forward the selected message in the body of a new message.
could not get information for file.
when ms. evans took her job several important divisions that had reported to her predecessor were n't included partly because she did n't wish to be a full-time administrator.
maximum value.
the company also disclosed that during that period it offered 10,000 yen or about $ 70 for another contract.
the message is too large.
save layer offset.
eskisehir.
tiaret.
crop.
it found that of the 73  who import 10  said they imported more in october and 12  said they imported less than the previous month.
riff audio.
and unlike some trays there 's no place for food.
the city had expected to pay about 11 million yen $ 77,000 but fujitsu essentially offered to do it for free.
dolný hričov.
expunge.
the requirement is expected to be met even through the production of the factory of the royal nepalese army.
automatic link recognition.
do not exist.
the union vote to reject the proposed pact was 230-215.
allow only the users below.
blur radius.
calendar event it has no summary.
contact editor.
create a rule to filter messages to this mailing list.
sharpen.
robert l. bernstein chairman and president of random house inc. announced his resignation from the publishing house he has run for 23 years.
string you want to search for.
the alignment of the lines in the text of the label relative to each other. this does not affect the alignment of the label within its allocation. see gtkmiscxalign for that.
filename.
download complete and in download only mode.
font for text.
whether selected objects display a selection cue the same as in selector.
the average seven-day compound yield of the 400 taxable funds tracked by ibc 's money fund report eased a fraction of a percentage point to 8.45  from 8.47  for the week ended tuesday.
crane & co. securities inc. of mount clemens mich. and its president glenn r. crane of sterling heights mich. consented to a joint fine of $ 10,000.
move to workspace down.
pescara.
prevent the user to lock his screen.
the direction that matches the original image the closest is selected.
while program trades swiftly kicked in a  circuit breaker  that halted trading in stock futures in chicago made some program trading impossible.
move partition to the left.
rays.
an error occurred.
clickdrag to add to the current selection.
investment and savings : in fiscal year 1990/91, gross investment is estimated to have increased at a rate of approximately 28.4 percent to rs. 21,163 million, which stands at 20.1 percent of gross domestic product.
the government policy instead of being incentive oriented was control oriented to attract the foreign investment.
a bank spokeswoman also declined to comment on any merger-related matters but said the company decided to drop its opposition to the interstate banking legislation because  prevailing sentiment is in favor of passage.
garbage magazine billed as  the practical journal for the environment  is about to find out.
alternate the rotation direction for each row.
all information on this meeting will be deleted and can not be restored.
unindent node.
for reading and storing local mail in external standard mbox spool files. may also be used to read a tree of elm, pine, or mutt style folders.
at least one attendee is necessary.
the deficit between the public sector negative savings and investment will be borne thorough foreign assistance and internal borrowing.
document ended unexpectedly inside a comment or processing instruction.
esso said the whiting field started production tuesday.
gconf error.
adding checkerboard.
all shapes.
cleanup.
nl which closed unchanged at 22 3/4 has a stake of just under 10.
positive displacement rotary pump or compressor.
right margin set.
change the workspace layout of the screen to use number columns.
welcome.
the kearny n.j.-based maker of hair accessories and other cosmetic products said it cut the dividend due to its third-quarter loss of $ 992,000 or 15 cents a share.
wallops from.
the government also raised the salary in accordance with the recommendations of the commission.
by comparison for the first nine months xerox earned $ 492 million or $ 4.55 a share on revenue of $ 12.97 billion.
open image.
unread messages.
lead underwriters for the issue are scotia mcleod inc. and rbc dominion securities inc. both toronto-based investment dealers.
zoom out.
used.
wiener neustadt.
attribute name.
rock springs.
could not close source folder.
alta floresta.
del rio.
last week robert m. bradley one of the big board 's most respected floor traders and head of a major traders ' organization surrendered.
evolution vcalendar importer.
passwd password updated successfully.
invalid unicode in error message.
counting rod numerals.
tekamah.
archive has no newlines in header.
flat color.
channel authentication.
retalhuleu.
the adjustment that holds the value of the spinbutton.
w. ed tyler 37 years old a senior vice president at this printing concern was elected president of its technology group a new position.
the following packages are broken.
control of population growth : the available resources in the country cannot forever sustain the current rate of population growth.
either the host name or port number specified for your given proxy type is invalid.
tile height.
could not create an instance of the sample echo component.
ziguinchor.
show server options.
toggles whether to display categories.
interactive.
zoom in/out by.
subject is.
u.s. chip makers are facing continued slack demand following a traditionally slow summer.
username.
sidebar.
floatingpoint exception.
san francisco voters rejected a new ballpark two years ago.
but the number of weddings last year 271,124 was still well below the 400,000 registered in 1972 the last year of increasing marriages.
alpha opacity.
having the dividend increases is a supportive element in the market outlook but i do n't think it 's a main consideration  he says.
yellow.
horz. spacing.
change user information for.
in a telephone interview mr. reupke said his departure was for  personal reasons  which he declined to specify.
thus, the share of industrial goods slightly declined from 69.1 percent in f.y. 1990/91 to 63.4 percent on f.y. 1991/92.
pretax profit fell 3.7  to # 128 million from # 133 million and was below analysts ' expectations of # 130 million to # 135 million but shares rose 6 pence to 388 pence in early trading yesterday in london.
an error occurred while loading or saving configuration information forsome of your configuration settings may not work properly.
old crow.
thus, the rapid growth in net foreign debts led to an increased burden on the economy.
daytona beach.
the industrial policies of the past had emphasized the creation of industrial environment to increase the contribution of the industrial sector to the economy by infusing momentum into this sector.
by the time i got there, the van driver had reached them.
the folder contents could not be displayed.
the following packages will be upgraded.
mr. samnick said a guild disciplinary hearing is scheduled next monday in new york.
unable to restore a listener on address couldn't resolve the database.
passphrase for new pgp key.
pet owners must ensure the surroundings are kept clean by collecting and disposing of animal waste properly.
could not open console.
spot function.
image map.
the height for each table cell. can be a number or a percent.
if true, pressing a key jumps the scrollbar to the bottom.
plain text.
quips george foot a managing partner at newgate management associates of northampton mass.
nevertheless, in order to assist interested persons interested in of undertaking separate analysis and arriving at relevant conclusions, that data pertaining to the fiscal year 1961/62, 1964/65, 1972/73, 1974/75 and 1989/90 have been presented separately in some tables.
the birds are flying back in flocks to their nests.
the total of 18 deaths from malignant mesothelioma lung cancer and asbestosis was far higher than expected the researchers said.
take a screenshot.
over the recent years, there has been an increased trend of migration from rural to urban areas.
therefore, there has emerged and urgent need to formulate and implement timely policies and programmes with regard to housing and urbanization.
general appliance.
last but not least, we should not waste.
pacific/rarotonga.
find.
airbrush tool paint using a brush, with variable pressure.
disable.
enter the room name to join here or click on one or more rooms in the list.
thunderstorm.
keyboard shortcut to open a new window.
during the same period, while the private sector loans increased by 21.3 percent, the government sector borrowing recorded a growth of 28.5 percent.
symmetric control.
scalable vector graphics.
duplicate path.
click to set a new heal source.
the gdkscreen for the renderer.
tiff image.
control.
another very important use of forests is a modern one.
without health we cannot do anything in this world.
/conversation/view log.
become root.
millimeters.
deleting selected objects.
task list.
emmonak.
reload the package cache.
the truck maker said the significant drop in net income will result in lower earnings for the fiscal year.
paths tool create and edit paths.
account search.
pause after downloading files.
build date.
select theme.
background.
the loan may be extended by the mcalpine group for an additional year with an increase in the conversion price to $ 2.50 a share.
right now we 're lucky if after five years we keep one new ringer out of 10  he adds.
destroy.
you may choose to wait a short while for it to continue or force the application to quit entirely.
randomly interchange some pixels with neighbors.
only the minority are actively involved in sports.
cazaux.
national tyre which has 420 branches throughout the u.k. had 1988 pretax profit of # 8.5 million.
quality.
getting information of on.
it is estimated that a total of 598,804 ha of land will have received irrigation facility by the end of fy 1991/1 92.further details are given in table 1.
unmaximize.
clone view.
position.
under the present circumstances, the money-supply should be maintained within desirable limits without causing any undue scarcity of capital to intensify the pace of economic development.
export options.
commercial paper : high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.62  30 days ; 8.55  60 days ; 8.45  90 days.
always load images from the internet.
it also said that in july it bid 10,000 yen to design a system for the saitama prefectural library and two years ago it bid one yen to plan the telecommunications system for wakayama prefecture.
we can achieve everything impossible to make our life successful and we can, if we wish, ruin the whole human race.
new diagram.
but new york state which is seeking solutions to its prison cell shortage says  no.
the other side he argues  knows giuliani has always been pro-choice even though he has personal reservations.
the teacher in question was nancy yeargin considered by many students and parents to be one of the best at the school.
no bookmarks defined.
border.
song lyrics.
saarland.
open messages.
mr. stronach founder and controlling shareholder of magna resigned as chief executive officer last year to seek unsuccessfully a seat in canada 's parliament.
copy.
row spacing.
open in new window.
is not currently installed, so it will not be reinstalled.
adobe font metrics.
cannot allocate colormap structure.
winder.
northern territory.
gimp user installation.
icon panel.
modelines.
the 40-year-old mr. murakami is a publishing sensation in japan.
error reading.
save changes.
projects.
semicolon.
loading. please wait.
altoona.
list of currently active gtk modules.
hence, though it was claimed that massive expansion of institutional bases of the forest sector and tree plantation works was undertaken during this period, the present dilapidated situation of the forest vindicates the fact that due attention was not paid towards forest conservation, promotion and utilization.
a project has been initiated in view of the natural gas deposits found at different places in the kathmandu valley.
merge imported paths.
template database not specified in config file.
cannot detach.
whether default toolbars have text only, text and icons, icons only, etc.
family planning programme was launched as a national programme only from fy 1965/66 through the government and non-government associations and institutions while maternity child health programe was initiated around fy 1973/74 only.
if you continue to do this the investor becomes frightened any investor : the odd lotter mutual funds and pension funds  says larry zicklin managing partner at neuberger & berman.
jendouba.
the average estimate of 22 economists polled by dow jones capital markets report was that non-farm payrolls expanded by 152,000 in october.
mr. gartner is editor and co-owner of the daily tribune in ames iowa and president of nbc news in new york.
the smooth functioning of an organization depends upon the level of understanding the employees have about business communication.
packages with unsatisfied dependencies the dependency requirements of these packages will be unmet after the install is complete.the presence of this tree probably indicates that something is broken, either on your system or in the debian archive.
black point compensation.
pilot mound.
copy email address.
what 's different is that it is happening with young wines just coming out.
unknown message.
because of deteriorating hearing she told colleagues she feared she might not be able to teach much longer.
primerica as expected also acquired certain assets of the agency and assumed certain of its liabilities.
backend ' missing required vtable member '.
an engineer will examine a structure, like a bridge, to see if it is safe.
no voices available.
orientation.
undo.
but it does n't take much to get burned.
deprecated property, use shadowtype instead.
birth date.
barnaul.
data name.
whether to insert spaces instead of tabs.
no error.
run 'help' to see a full list of available command line options.
the scammers themselves were garden-variety low lifes conspicuous consumers who wanted big houses mercedes cars beautiful women expensive clothes.
new view.
all channels.
output will be gradually increased until it reaches about 11,000 barrels a day.
summary contains.
user defined signal 1.
double click distance.
conflicting options are present and.
unsort.
james l. pate 54-year-old executive vice president was named a director of this oil concern expanding the board to 14 members.
force.
application options.
homogeneous.
python source.
increase indent.
randomly placed gaps on redeal.
america/montevideo.
unknown styleset on element.
remote keys.
enable caret mode, so that you can see a cursor when reading mail.
rawlins.
in the process if implementing this system, the budget was increased 5 to 6 times in the districts where the education plan had been introduced the schools run with the public participation were brought under the government employees on the name of making the teaching profession attractive, a ten month mandatory field work under the national development service porgramme was introduced sixteen institutes and campuses were established by bringing about fundamental changes in the administrative set up of teaching institutions providing higher education.
so the distinction between personal and political motivation behind lawlessness must be made.
the nagging memory of one afternoon fourteen years ago drove jim gideon a lean 36-year-old right hander to take a four-month leave from selling insurance in texas to try out for mr. weaver's team.
if we look to the future preventing homelessness is an important objective.
thus, at present there is a persistent need for extensive policy reforms and changes.
transmission statistics.
it is estimated that the total consumption in fiscal year 1990/91 increased by 15.4 percent amounting to rs. 94,836 millions.
then in the guests ' honor the speedway hauled out four drivers crews and even the official indianapolis 500 announcer for a 10-lap exhibition race.
it is also difficult for the government to pursue development based on their meager resources.
aerator with bubbles.
and surprising numbers of small investors seem to be adapting to greater stock market volatility and say they can live with program trading.
rename.
a successor was n't named.
in the past decade japanese manufacturers concentrated on domestic production for export.
finmeccanica is an italian state-owned holding company with interests in the mechanical engineering industry.
selection mode.
personal web page.
document not saved.
sgml document.
failed to locate a valid control file.
retype password.
please enter a buddy to pounce.
vendor block contains no fingerprint.
randomize the tile hue by this percentage.
as background.
rivers are the greatest natural resources in nepal.
t v. has become a powerful educative factor.
travelers 's employee benefits group which includes its group health insurance operations posted earnings of $ 24 million compared with a loss of $ 3 million last year.
minimum value.
whether strikethrough attribute is set.
simple vessel.
stung by the giuliani ads mr. dinkins 's tv consultants robert shrum and david doak finally unleashed a negative ad of their own.
money especially comes in handy when a family member is stricken with a disease and cash is needed for treatment.
new folder.
clickdrag to change the shape of the curve.
hint to help the desktop environment understand what kind of window this is and how to treat it.
error writing resolver state to.
szeged.
background color as a possibly unallocated gdkcolor.
people have managed their drainage in rivers.
whether entered text overwrites existing contents.
he takes out time for his children from the busy schedule.
confirm password.
click or press enter to convert to a selection.
the item could not be deleted because permission was denied.
in addition the cray-3 will contain 16 processors twice as many as the largest current supercomputer.
others talk in chat.
the padding to insert at the left of the widget.
the price of food and beverages increased at 9.8 percent whereas the pricfe of nonfood goods and services increased at 9.6 percent during this period.
update policy.
replace.
no registered source can handle uri.
default display.
nil constant.
forward.
the large investment of the private sector in industry was greatly attracted to the activities yielding quick and easy return.
then, i gathered my school bag and walked briskly in the direction of my school.
mr. martin has increased prices on some wines like grgich hills chardonnay now $ 32 just to slow down movement but he is beginning to see some resistance to high-priced red burgundies and cabernets and chardonnays in the $ 30 to $ 40 range.
add a starburst to the image.
the protracted downturn reflects the intensity of bank of japan yen-support intervention since june when the u.s. currency temporarily surged above the 150.00 yen level.
reverse dragging selects intersecting objects.
click to switch to.
the chicago report raised the possibility that the october survey of the national association of purchasing management would also show a reading above 50.
despite the continued efforts to increase revenue and control regular expenditure, there was no marked increade in the revenue surplus because of a low collection of taxes particularly in 1990.91 and the pressure of the increased salary of civil servants on regular expenditure especially in the latter months of 1991/92.
equal height.
upjohn a rumored target within the drug industry advanced 7/8 to 38 7/8.
the text of the label.
compressed output needs a compression set.
do not send.
arbitraging on differences between spot and futures prices is an important part of many financial markets he says.
show or hide the toolbar in the current window.
what to do when the space bar is pressed in the image window.
split takes at most a source filename and destination prefix.
sealed tank.
southwest.
nenana.
bella coola.
when the company asked members in a mailing which cars they would like to get information about for possible future purchases buick came in fourth among u.s. cars and in the top 10 of all cars the spokeswoman says.
can't execute sensiblepager, is this a working debian system?
text only.
america/santiago.
interpolation.
size of check or radio indicator.
on the big board a  side car  is put into effect when the s&p futures rise or fall 12 points.
fuzzy select tool select a contiguous region on the basis of color.
mrs. ward resolved to clean out  deadwood  in the school 's faculty and restore safety and she also had some new factors working in her behalf.
save image.
uruguay.
run program.
waterlevel.
gaussian blur.
whether the combo box draws a frame around the child.
giant group is led by three rally 's directors burt sugarman james m. trotter iii and william e. trotter ii who earlier this month indicated they had a 42.5  stake in rally 's and planned to seek a majority of seats on rally 's nine-member board.
whether two cursors should be displayed for mixed lefttoright and righttoleft text.
diffusion dist.
message received begins conversation.
million-dollar conferences were held to chew on subjects such as  ethical responsibilities of scientists in support of disarmament  and  the impact of the activities of transnational corporations.
is used to notify that the table column description has changed.
with a view to projecting panchayat as a democration system, some efforts were made with regard to decentralization but there occurred centralization with several instances of retrieval of the decentralized authority.
but like other thrifts it 's expected to seek regulators ' consent to create a distinct junk-bond entity.
the consequences can be serious both for the natural world and for man himself.
this definition of development not only includes economic development but also social and cultural betterment of society.
new profile.
fall back to threading messages by subject.
error reading from child.
radius of the innermost revolution relative to the spiral size.
motion threshold.
potchefstroom.
reset permanent.
format the device.
normally closed position switch vertical.
while parsing token.
kirkwall.
serial number.
could not open destination.
three computers that changed the face of personal computing were launched in 1977.
iff image.
error message.
assuming that post at the age of 35 he managed by consensus as is the rule in universities says warren h. strother a university official who is researching a book on mr. hahn.
this is an ideal way to see life from a new perspective.
pocatello.
radiation.
the consistency checks performed on the credential failed.
right up front in the preface co-author william sternberg gives us an example of his own integrity.
font points.
despite the economic slowdown there are few clear signs that growth is coming to a halt.
separate to.
quoted.
style of bevel around the spin button.
next chapter or movie.
applixware words document.
bukoba.
alias contact.
multiple styles.
source : telerate systems inc.
delete connection point.
mask bitmap to use with gdkimage or gdkpixmap.
number of cycles covering full value range.
batch command to run can be used multiple times.
capacity utilization in industries, profit yielding and investment with value added activities were slake.
netsonar.
asia/kuching.
some u.s. firms notably salomon inc. and morgan stanley group inc. have reaped a hefty chunk of their japanese earnings from index arbitrage both for customers and for their own accounts.
ciscoworks man.
russellville.
inefficient administration : inefficiency in the administration has led to a further deterioration in the government's institutional abilities to effectively implement development programmes.
revert.
up arrow.
would you like gimp to rotate it into the standard orientation?
unable to add to your buddy list. error creating folder in server side list.
matrix.
unable to open saved state file.
high private use surrogates.
however, the construction of this highways designed to link the remote,  inaccessible far western region could not be completed even within the stretch of 30 years.
the children were made to absorb them as a sponge absorbs water.
spike density.
this message is signed with a valid signature, but the sender of the message cannot be verified.
dynamic row header cleared.
scanner/camera.
already the consequences are being felt by other players in the financial markets even governments.
newhall.
display more information about the selected package.
for each clone, pick a value from the drawing in that clone's location and apply it to the clone.
encoding.
/sort objects/by type.
building dependency tree.
specifies the size of the fixedwidth font used to display the log in the main tree view. the default is taken from the default terminal font size.
government building.
launch.
set the notification text.
the movie ends with sound the sound of street people talking and there is n't anything whimsical or enviable in those rough beaten voices.
more than one copy of package has been unpacked in this run ! only configuring it once.
unable to recompose, source layer not found.
change passphrase.
program.
trigger.
moreover usx exports more than other steelmakers and the overseas market has been under more severe pricing pressure.
synchronize with buddy list now.
resize.
a value greater than 0 determines the seconds an image stays on screen until the next one is shown automatically. zero disables the automatic browsing.
enter your secure shell passphrase.
in addition, the mode of producti8ion continued to be traditional.
inverse.
builtin schemes.
trace the drawing under the tiles.
voronoimode makes only the vector closest to the given point have any influence.
calibrate monitor resolution.
pneumatic line.
košice.
dot system the  designated order turnaround  system was launched by the new york stock exchange in march 1976 to offer automatic high-speed order processing.
at one point hammersmith is reported to have accounted for as much as 10  of the sterling market in interest-rate swap dealings.
of course if the film contained dialogue mr. lane 's artist would be called a homeless person.
therefore, in order to raise the productivity of the government sector, special emphasis will have to be given on the method of selecting appropriate projects, appropriate pricing policy, reformative institutionalized systems of monitoring and evaluation and the privatization of government undertakings.
/conversation/add buddy pounce.
west memphis.
used for converting to cdquality audio, but with a lossy compression codec. use this for cd extraction and radio recordings.
one big reason : thin margins.
it is estimated that the total consumption in fiscal year 1990/91 increased by 15.4 percent amounting to rs. 94,836 millions.
northwest.
recursively unset all keys at or below the key/directory names on the command line.
ainsworth.
associate buddy.
could not create working folder.
select objects matching all of the fields you filled in.
whether to run a custom command instead of the shell.
horizontal scale per row in  of tile width.
but it is n't clear how long gm would be willing to fight ford for jaguar.
it could operate to augment our budget  james rill the justice department 's antitrust chief said in an interview.
could not rename the file.
your comments implied we had discovered that the  principal cause  of homelessness is to be found in the large numbers of mentally ill and substance-abusing people in the homeless population.
folder.
recognize links in text and replace them.
skip backwards.
whether this tag affects tabs.
you have to enter a filename.
not implemented.
authenticating.
the default height of the window, used when initially showing the window.
america/glacebay.
go to date.
these are the main proponents of program trading.
before the end of the appointment.
pure virtual packages.
pneumatic pressure source.
hangul syllables.
consolidated rail corp. said it would spend more than $ 30 million on 1,000 enclosed railcars for transporting autos.
failed to close new saved state file.
upto the end of fy 1989/90, 7,330 km. of road facility was available in the country out of which 2,958km. was black topped, 1,658km. graveled and 2,714 km. fair weather road.
seed of random only for "from seed" modes.
directory busy.
the net forging assets increased form rs. 6203.5 million in mid july 1989 to rs. 16,150.7 million in mid july 1991.
kisumu.
finalsettling basin.
delegate to.
they expect him to cut costs throughout the organization.
smear colors to simulate an oil painting.
an assorted collection of polygons, beziergons and other miscellaneous geometric shapes.
invert case.
and they believe the big board under mr. phelan has abandoned their interest.
icalendar information.
open the tree view when the file browser plugin gets loaded instead of the bookmarks view.
yet many economists are n't predicting that the economy is about to slip into recession.
ual rose 1 1/2 to 177.
contacts.
open preferences for the dropper tool.
user is not present in the network.
the new software is based on novell inc. 's netware network operating system software.
kaltag.
cardston.
binary program.
symbolic link.
low surrogates.
high contrast.
the tokyo stock price index of all issues listed in the first section which declined 5.16 on monday was up 16.05 or 0.60  at 2692.65 on tuesday.
add script.
besides being a  minority-owned company  wedtech was located in the south bronx a blighted area made famous by jimmy carter in his 1976 presidential campaign.
the offer which was due to expire yesterday is conditional on 50.1  of dunkin' common shares on a fully diluted basis being tendered and on the withdrawal of the company 's poison pill rights plan.
unknown error.
atlantic/canary.
named pipe.
width of the index and search pane.
unroll.
object is not a storage.
today we are moving products and tomorrow we would be moving ideas.
depends.
sort by progress.
make all warnings fatal.
dialogs stay on top of document windows.
toolbar style.
authorization aborted.
given name.
musical symbols.
is not flagged.
asunción.
i get the impression that some japanese managers believe working harder for less money is beautiful.
paste tasks from the clipboard.
the nepal television has started operation its service since 1985.
is expanded.
justification.
bramalea said it expects to complete the issue by the end of the month.
do not disturb.
president bush should set things straight.
this object has no properties.
a gdkpixbuf to display.
maximum zoom level.
as shown in table 7, during the eighth plan, the share of revenue surplus in development outlay will remain 27.5 percent and the share of foreign aid will be maintained at 65.5 percent.
signal name.
secretary of state for trade and industry nicholas ridley said later in the day that the government would abolish its golden share in jaguar the luxury auto maker being stalked by general motors and ford motor.
unknown element.
so, what are examinations, and how can they be any good?
cannot read extension from.
moves flat review to the previous item or word.
john a. conlon jr. 45 was named a managing director at this investment-banking company.
in this context, it has become essential to emphasize on the irrigation development for increased agricultural production and with the use of surface and groundwater resources available in the country.
bringing their children for walks in the morning or evening is a good start to achieve this goal.
call money : 9 3/4.
select all accounts that buddies should be autoadded to.
some of the proposed fixes for what is labeled  program-trading volatility  could be far worse than the perceived problem.
unique id.
ip information.
gatekeeper.
line width.
show/hide controls.
manager.
conversations.
the following will be undertaken to this end.
sounds for events.
partial email message.
drop new layer.
prioritize message.
replace.
add name.
slashed cross.
stroke paint.
pictures of rusted oil drums swim into focus and the female voice purrs  that hazardous waste on his -lcb- mr. courter 's -rcb- property the neighbors are suing for consumer fraud.
no less significant than the japanese banks' attempt to cut off funds to pressure a foreign government are the implications of a confrontation between japan securities and banking industries.
error while readingfile corrupted?
you must specify packages by their own names, not by quoting the names of the files they come in.
mozilla firefox installer.
error while reading.
error writing to temporary file for  the original file has not been touched.
the leadership hopes to move the compromise measure promptly to the white house but in recent days the senate has been as likely to bounce bills back to the house.
worthington.
the two of hearts.
further acceleration in industrial production is expected as a result of the new industrial policy.
boolean value.
invalid work phone.
monte real.
move floating selection.
sanandaj.
middleclick inside preview to pick "from color".
landscape.
the following packages have been kept back.
descending.
january platinum was down $ 5.70 an ounce at $ 494.50.
reload the current location.
failed to stat.
you must specify a background for an alpha value to be meaningful.
drag to reorder nodes.
he must give them good advice and teach them how to become good citizens.
a door is open on the printer “”.
communication interface.
read only.
people live in the same neighborhood for many reasons.
random seed.
they got us thinking maybe we should be helping u.s. companies improve existing products rather than always developing new ones.
nothing selected for saving. would you like to try again?
increases the speech pitch.
bilinear.
the desired number of scans.
he also rejected reports that his departure stemmed from disappointment the general manager 's post had n't also led to a board directorship at the london-based news organization.
used to encrypt email and files.
the move leaves united illuminating co. and northeast utilities as the remaining outside bidders for ps of new hampshire which also has proposed an internal reorganization plan in chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings under which it would remain an independent company *t*-2.
peripheral processing.
the gene thus can prevent a plant from fertilizing itself.
selects if to place strokes all the way out to the edges of the image.
most are trim.
create in folder.
share your desktop with other users.
signed message.
people of every religion can celebrate their festivals according to their culture and traditions.
midland.
display information on this gnome version.
has a maximum zoom level.
dull green.
the permissions could not be changed.
martin marietta corp. was given a $ 29.9 million air force contract for low-altitude navigation and targeting equipment.
select folder.
preview.
transforms.
pick a path.
boeing co. said it is discussing plans with three of its regular japanese suppliers * to possibly help build a larger version of its popular 767 twin-jet.
adjust score.
inactive.
telepathy indicator service.
your login has expired.
gimp gradients.
define rectangle area.
could not create directory.
the new plant located in chinchon about 60 miles from seoul will help meet increasing and diversifying demand for control products in south korea the company said.
australia/melbourne.
if both agencies find violations of the u.s. trade law the u.s. would assess penalty duties on the imports which already are subject to import quotas under bilateral textile and apparel trade agreements.
rotation.
corvallis.
they say greedy market manipulators have made a shambles of the nation 's free-enterprise system turning the stock market into a big gambling den with the odds heavily stacked against the small investor.
recursive.
the toronto-based real estate concern said each bond warrant entitles the holder to buy c$ 1,000 principal amount of debentures at par plus accrued interest to the date of purchase.
directory to remove from configuration file.
the nicaraguan president citing attacks by the u.s.-backed rebels suspended a 19-month-old cease-fire and accused bush of  promoting death.
new braunfels.
foot.
index.
polymorphic.
child internal width padding.
a majority of an nih-appointed panel recommended late last year that the research continue under carefully controlled conditions but the issue became embroiled *-2 in politics as anti-abortion groups continued to oppose federal funding.
no image.
directories cannot be added to video or audio discs.
automatically upgrade installed packages.
instead mr. nixon reminded his host chinese president yang shangkun that americans have n't forgiven china 's leaders for the military assault of june 3-4 that killed hundreds and perhaps thousands of demonstrators.
hence, school going children would be exposed to healthy eating form young.
show position.
those mentally disabled suffer from mental retardation such as cerebral palsy and down syndrome among others.
as technologies begin to integrate, economies and cultures will also integrate slowly but surely.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 8.
kermanshah.
the amount of space to add on the left and right of the widget, in pixels.
add label comments to printing output.
show load/save options.
writing error.
mrs. yeargin says she pleaded guilty because she realized it would no longer be possible to win reinstatement and because she was afraid of further charges.
arrow keys move by.
now 13 years later mr. lane has revived his artist in a full-length movie called  sidewalk stories  a poignant piece of work about a modern-day tramp.
start event  timer.
wrap license.
has an invalid format.
type field.
filename that should be displayed in the file entry.
mark foreground by painting on the object to extract.
1 exactly.
esbjerg.
fire was most probably the first breakthrough by man in the realm of nature.
resolved address to a readonly configuration source at position.
automatic contacts.
zealous cropping.
open images as new.
photocopy.
for the fifth consecutive month purchasing managers said prices for the goods they purchased fell.
toggle whether the currently selected action is approved.
no longer permitted to access the system.
the year 1960/61 has been taken as the base for the analysis if those sectors where the 1961/62 data were not available.
solid color.
no matches for your query.
the news presented to us can be biased and one sided.
parasites.
lamoni.
for wide view.
create a new task.
cannot rename folder  invalid operation.
use stock.
failed to write some configuration data to disk.
you either believe seymour can do it again or you do n't.
aisleriot cannot find the last game you played.
asia/bahrain.
font stretch.
navigation preview size.
tool controls bar.
gypsy.
the chinese responded in an equally undiplomatic fashion.
show hidden files.
percentage of pixels to be filtered.
sorry, the program closed unexpectedly.
list type.
conversation with.
client options.
element is not allowed below.
argentia.
database connect error.
all these considerations clearly indicate that energy development should be accorded high priority in nepal's development planning.
reads the attributes associated with the current text character.
package names provided by.
draw handles.
as specified above.
the government will invest in the creation of infrastructure of industry and tourism, and provide support to the private sector.
this is an added reason for resisting deforestation.
export loaded file and exit.
draw value.
trough border.
title menu.
carbondale.
end event  multiple.
encodings shown in menu.
as a result of the increase in the consumption expenditure, the occurred a decline in gross domestic savings by 3.9 percent, thus bringing down thepercent to 6.1 in 1989/90.
handshaking.
join in chat.
oak ridge.
class name.
show next object.
america/whitehorse.
the agency publicly and officially declared in the lawsuit that persons who examine the materials may make notes and while the agency position is that persons may not take verbatim notes no one will check to determine what notes a person has taken  mr. mccormick reported.
liquefy.
hidden file.
relay horizontal.
contents.
about this game.
thankfully, her unborn baby was unharmed.
distribute selected nodes horizontally.
you cannot add the same person twice to a conversation.
copy all contacts to.
the diagram has not been saved. save changes now?
delete the selection from the archive.
message.
run command as a login shell.
only one unique color.
at the same time, agricultural credit disbursed during that period amounted to rs. 1095.3 million.
such an application for federal antitrust clearance is necessary for any investor that might seek control.
they do not realize however that sets the stage for an unhealthy lfestyle for their children who quickly become addicted to such foods.
layer background type. copy causes the previous layer to be copied before the draw is performed.
they know that whenever government is redistributing wealth regulating commerce or maintaining a large defense establishment there is big money to be made in influencing brokering or selling the processes and decisions of government.
etherclient.
click to paint.
accounts.
syncing messages in folder to disk.
error loading diagram. linked object not found in document.
since continuity in development can not be achieved without a sustained rate of growth, this plan will adopt a selfsustainable development process from the village level onwards.
error performing search.
the theory was that the voice is a propaganda agency and this government should n't propagandize its own people.
upper hour in the time popup selector.
thus, the total trade deficit, which was rs. 16,594.2 million in 1990/91, increased to rs. 19,011.9 million in 1991/92.
mpeg video.
dismiss the dialog when 100 has been reached.
y alignment of the child.
install package file.
stars.
polar grid sectors desired.
analysts saw the latest offer as proof that mr. simmons an aggressive and persistent investor wo n't leave georgia gulf alone until some kind of transaction is completed.
entire layer.
he did n't see why the taxpayers should help build something he would then use to turn a healthy profit.
punched tape.
active tasks.
bivalent vertical rest.
volume down.
the five of spades.
move the selected filter up.
check spelling.
gnome partition editor.
sans 14.
mr. nixon met mr. bush and his national security adviser brent scowcroft before coming to china on saturday.
latina.
foreign trade and balance of payments situation 6.1 foreign trade an analysis of the data of the past years 19621990 reveals that the situation of foreign trade of the country was not in a good shape.
this memo recurs.
select the previous solution to the dependency problems.
select source.
sobel edge detecting.
service not available, closing transmission channel.
you fall into a pit! more.
sine characteristic or input.
zoom the page in.
toluca.
edge label switch router with netflow.
whether to allow bold text.
page navigation.
connect server.
curve type.
that file already exists.
dinard.
search in selection.
using new file as you requested.
melilla.
default path for the browse file window.
empty page.
the document “” is locked and requires a password before it can be opened.
hold.
search results.
still unresolved is sony 's effort to hire producers jon peters and peter guber to run the studio.
delete segment.
amount of border space between the menubar shadow and the menu items.
unsharp mask.
work on copy.
it was like living in a neighborhood where everyone knew everyone.
suggests.
open preferences for the text tool.
event forwarding.
go to the previous page.
snowstorm.
tabs.
a description of the profile, containing more information and describing when to use this profile.
show file operations.
opacity.
the incremental capital output ration is estimated to be as decline because of the projected better results of expenditures in governmental sectors to be made possible by the policy of economic liberalization in the private sector, and appropriate selection of projects, budget, expenditure, management and monitoring systems.
/buddies/join a chat.
save document under a new name.
plugin can only handle bitmap two color indexed images.
changes made to the document in the last hour will be permanently lost.
run a custom command instead of my shell.
history after all is not on his side.
small hub.
vertical text alignment.
fullscreen.
this way, they no longer have to depend on males and the socio-economic condition of women improves.
you need a passphrase to unlock the key for user.
work week view.
go to.
uzhhorod.
error changing password.
open with.
red wing.
this plan has made arrangements of adequate resources of further productive involvement of the existing human resources in the efforts of national development.
change.
it is very hard for easterners to resist westernization.
chambéry.
you could even do the entire length of nepal across the plains.
the construction of roads co uld not be completed as required nor could the economy derive maximum benefits from the constructed roads because of the excessive increase in the cost of road construction and the lack of timely repair and maintenance.
warning.
translator credits.
the current filter for selecting which files are displayed.
it is of course printed on recycled paper.
filename.
saturation phaseshift.
so motherhood as well as fatherhood must be praised and emphasised.
certificates.
there are, of course, other reasons for damming a river.
move tool move layers, selections, and other objects.
as mr. whiting describes it nipponese baseball is a  mirror of japan 's fabled virtues of hard work and harmony.
resize mode of the column.
with the harvest winding down however some analysts are speculating that prices might jump in some regions as u.s. exporters try to gather the corn they are obligated to deliver.
istar diagram.
america/thule.
an error occurred while printing.
since the existing labour force is largely illiterate and unskilled, basic education and technical and vocational training opportunities will be expanded with particular emphasis on rural areas.
delta.
add.
error while copying.
whether selected objects display gradient editing controls.
lexical.
reassembled package file.
as the london trading session drew to a close the market was still listening to the parliamentary debate on the economy with new chancellor of the exchequer john major expected to clarify his approach to the british economy and currency issues.
save image.
line style used for the grid.
diaplugininit call failed.
query the length of time the screensaver has been active.
custom is a common habit and tradition is a belief.
you do not have sufficient permissions to delete this mail.
children should be exposed to the multi faiths in the country.
password for document.
film strips, from which children absorb facts much more quickly than they do from a book, are widely used too.
move a card to the foundation.
your current status.
reducing volatility.
unset status.
the symptom is not known.
fresel lantern.
an error has occurred while trying to launch the default web browser. please check your settings in the 'preferred applications' preference tool.
the league's promoters hope retirees and tourists will join die-hard fans like mr. de castro and pack the stands to see the seniors.
override for height request of the widget, or 1 if natural request should be used.
open preferences for the node tool.
unset stroke.
pixel width.
but for me, jogging is also a fun activity that gives me great pleasure.
nonfree multiverse.
unable to invite user.
channel passphrase.
a spokesman for the guild said the union 's lawyers are reviewing the suit.
they become open to new ideas and learn to work together to obtain common goals.
initial color for clones works only if the original has unset fill or stroke.
ours customs, traditions and our whole lifestyle are highly influenced by religious beliefs.
agadir.
searcy.
the herald 's sports coverage and arts criticism were also highly regarded.
rocky mount.
paragraph marker.
splash.
but for small american companies it also provides a growing source of capital and even marketing help.
editor font.
day ends.
in addition recent industry forecasts for 1990 indicate a slow environment at least until midyear.
assistant.
parse error in.
cancel the task of another user.
as shown in talbe 4, of the total development outlay of 113,479 million, social services and agriculture, irrigation and forestry sectors will receive a higher share of the total development outlay 31.5 and 25.7 percent respectively followed by electricity 20.9 percent and transport and communications 17.7 percent.
failure remote does not support proposed cipher.
drag move.
their own employer kidder peabody.
table row header.
data type.
outset.
search artists.
choose the destination for this import.
smoothing parameters.
the king of spades.
is not a regular file. cowardly refusing to overwrite it.
you did not note that the homeless people we examined had a multitude of physical disorders in addition to their psychiatric problems and substance abuse.
gtk im preedit style.
redo.
pin toolbar.
triangular bullet.
failure listing entries in '.
similarly, according to a preliminary estimate, the per capita gdp is expected to increase only by 1 percent in 1991/92.
renamed layer.
select next.
chennai.
disk not found.
montijo.
office.
show.
besides eggers says grain elevators are worth preserving for aesthetic reasons one famed architect compared them to the pyramids of egypt.
transfer of file complete.
start from.
previous zoom.
export in progress.
the sweetened offer has acceptances from more than 50  of weisfield 's shareholders and it is scheduled for completion by dec. 10.
macedonian.
move all contacts to.
opening too many messages at once may take a long time.
initializing markup backend module.
hani zayadi was appointed president and chief executive officer of this financially troubled department store chain effective nov. 15 succeeding frank robertson who is retiring early.
documents/diagram.
the british government retained the single golden share after selling its stake in jaguar in the conservative government 's decision may reflect its desire to shed a politically sensitive issue well before the next election expected in late 1991.
saturation variations.
new channel.
recurrence.
glenn britta a 25-year-old new york financial analyst who plays options for his personal account says he is  factoring  the market 's volatility  into investment decisions.
normal size.
alpha channel will be ignored.
insert text file.
starwriter document.
number of pixels.
earnings were hurt by disposal of operations in its restructuring reed said.
there is no layer to transform.
at the end of world war ii germany surrendered before japan.
net income more than tripled to 4.898 billion yen from 1.457 billion yen a year earlier.
replace current selection.
goes to next heading.
porterville.
bad header line.
asia/dushanbe.
can focus.
muscular command.
zoom all.
dock the toolbar.
has signed on.
biosource genetics corp. vacaville calif. is developing a spray containing a gene that spreads from cell to cell and interferes with the genes that are responsible for producing pollen.
polarization.
newsprint.
almost all the cities and towns come under noise pollution.
failed to store mail in temp file.
set the message priority to high.
packages.
six point star.
sample merged.
decreases the speech pitch.
distribute selected nodes vertically.
thus, each doctor had to provide service to 14,958 people in 1990.
averaged.
skip.
wrong cdrom.
says mr. baldwin  we recognize that we may no longer have as high a priority in church life and experience.
bottom padding.
often, none of these facts were related to life.
edit quick mask attributes.
could not write log entry further operations on this server will not be replayed when you reconnect to the network.
mr. nixon also proposed that china restore its participation in the fulbright program a u.s. government-funded academic exchange.
mr. oxnard observed that the situation in brazil is also very complicated.
take the deal with candela laser corp. a wayland mass. manufacturer of high-tech medical devices which three years ago set its sights on japan as an export market.
publish and/or synchronize your keys with those online.
shift each row of pixels by a random amount.
save color here.
left cardinality.
procedure return.
portuguesebrazil.
on the monetary front, there has been an excessive increase in money supply since the last year.
filename.
when coming to fruits, preference should be given to our local fruits.
miscellaneous objects.
due to the lack of growth in employment opportunities in non-agricultural sectors, the labour force subsisting on agriculture could not be transferred to other sectors.
photos.
load defaults.
the sweeping nature of the bill draws a variety of special interest amendments running from an import exemption for a california airplane museum to a small but intriguing struggle among sugar producing nations over the fate of panama 's quota of exports to the profitable u.s. market.
close the window.
select color.
are you sure you want to permanently delete the user id?
postscript document.
move canceled.
current fixed width of the column.
address.
gimp brush file appears to be corrupted.
cancel the current mail operation.
toolbar.
a reinstatement of the uptick rule for program traders would slow their activity considerably.
choose shade of gray based on.
such problems will require considerable skill to resolve.
on wall street men and women walk with great purpose noticing one another only when they jostle for cabs.
the first and obvious danger is collision.
thus, there is a great need for additional reforms in spite of the various reforms proposed in this plan period.
maps.
expects the second argument to be a string.
operation canceled.
at the same time, while three industrial undertakings have already been privatized, the process of privatization will be further continued.
help document /not found.
maximized.
once there what ways of escape are open to them other than drink drugs or insanity ?
appointment.
lake charles.
cursor font.
minor time step.
supernova color picker.
in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday sea containers closed at $ 62.625 up 62.5 cents.
asked whether the bidding flap would hurt u.s.-japan relations mr. yamamoto said  this will be a minus factor.
the command organ of a relay vertical.
pixbuf.
rotate colors.
lower limit of ruler.
color density.
you have won.
paint options shared between tools.
almost equal to.
extra space to put between the child and its neighbors, in pixels.
coffeyville.
however, no real increase in export volume could be materialised due to the lake of sustainable and sound bases through product diversification.
because you do not trust the certificate authority that issued this certificate, then you do not trust the authenticity of this certificate unless otherwise indicated here.
failed to create a source element check your installation.
khon kaen.
reinitializing stream.
nevertheless, it cannot be denied that whatever sectors were completed, did contribute to linking the socioeconomic activities of the road corridors to the marketoriented economy.
must specify either a geometry or a parent that has a geometry.
identifier.
as for the findings on the 203 baltimore homeless who underwent psychiatric examinations i suggest you conduct your own survey.
wellington.
downloading.
on an average, a manager spends 60 per cent of his or her time in meetings and a significant time on telephoning, communicating and coordinating.
sea waves too have been exploited.
carnival said the fantasy a 2,050-passenger ship that was slated to be delivered this month will be delivered in january.
maximum number of colors.
use info window.
plans to do this are due to be filed in a week or so.
please enter the name of the group to be added.
sets how colors are mapped for your display.
pincher creek.
from reverse gradient.
whiteboard.
if you delete an item, it is permanently lost.
mr. pickens made considerable political hay with his troubles in japan.
some sort of error with the file extension or lack thereof.
force tiling?
population being thin everywhere it seemed to be everlasting source.
routing table information.
vivo video.
show repeated messages.
pages per sheet.
glossary.
let others see what computer you are using.
deriving smooth palette.
network statistics.
the acquisition of 87-store weisfield 's raises ratners 's u.s. presence to 450 stores.
but statistics has got several limitations.
the interactions between health and homelessness are complex defying sweeping generalizations as to  cause  or  effect.
america/cuiaba.
biscayne securities corp. of lauderhill fla. and a principal of the firm alvin rosenblum of plantation fla. were jointly fined $ 20,000 and given 10-day suspensions for allegedly selling securities at unfair prices.
pixels below lines set.
place cards on to the tableau to form poker hands.
the department of health and human services plans to extend its moratorium on federal funding of research involving fetal-tissue transplants.
delete ?
petrolina.
reading palette file  missing red component in line.
curves tool adjust color curves.
cannot expand.
collecting file provides.
show bonobo activation options.
available formats.
they have to prepare lessons day in and day out, standing in front of one class after another.
your password will be transmitted encrypted.
paste selection.
provides support for loading perl plugins.
estimates of development materials following is the estimated requirement of construction and development materials during the plan period for development programmes to be implemented during the eighth plan.
font size for label.
font for text with variable width.
earlier this year japanese investors snapped up a similar $ 570 million mortgage-backed securities mutual fund.
office.
smooth palette.
certificate authority key identifier.
start playback.
unable to perform search.
rms international inc. hasbrouk heights n.j. facing a cash-flow squeeze said it is seeking other financing sources and waivers from debenture holders.
fade.
sand.
but there 's disagreement over how to do it.
there are no items to show in this view. doubleclick here to create a new contact.
only create notifications for new mail in an inbox.
you 've got to make the restructuring work  said mr. baum.
comments string.
decoder failed.
data medium passive.
functional administrator.
joining requires an invitation.
the new agreement incorporates significant provisions such as mutual understanding to be reached on the issue of the exemption of indian tax on the export of primary goods from nepal, the reduction of the mandatory constituent percentage of indigenous raw materials from 80 percent to 65 percent in the manufactured products of nepal, the reduction of internal value added from 50 percent to 40 percent and so on.
if the present trend of population growth is allowed to continue, it will not be possible to meet the demands of the people without causing permanent damage to the bio-physical resources.
a list of style attributes to apply to the text of the label.
do not update the library with file changes.
abort.
that went over the permissible line for warm and fuzzy feelings.
other address label.
processor.
the roofs would be required to withstand a force of 1.5 times the unloaded weight of the vehicle.
a voice says  c'mon now do n't you have boyfriends ?
numeric.
the calendar attached is not valid.
groupwise home screen name 3.
unable to mount the selected floppy drive.
formatting elements.
angular gradient.
when the original moves, its clones and linked offsets.
bogofilter options.
content router.
operating system.
font stretch.
broken packages.
oscoda.
it should be attractive, colorful and inviting,.
leftright arrow.
statistically, air travel is reasonably safe when compared with road, rail and sea.
instead of 50/50 it became on paper only two-thirds mariotta one-third neuberger and they were in the program and off to the races.
display the cell.
split segments uniformly.
tijuana.
the japanese  should see this rhetoric as a signal of the need for a change in their own economy  says charles dallara u.s. assistant treasury secretary who has been in tokyo this week informally discussing the impending negotiations with government and business leaders.
requires a match type string.
old key passphrase.
los alamitos.
martinique.
the house was ablaze and thick clouds of smoke were floating up into the clouds.
downloading podcast.
garments are designed to go with every mood of the individual and to fit in every occasion of life.
the currently selected filename.
mr. hahn agrees that he has a  retentive  memory but friends say that 's an understatement.
greater involvement of orivate sector in required in the generaion and distribution of hydro electricity, too.
iqaluit.
this sets the number of addresses to show in default message list view, beyond which a  is shown.
climb rate.
crude as they were these early pcs triggered explosive product development in desktop models for the home and office.
unmaximize.
the provided targetname parameter was illformed.
returns to object with keyboard focus.
the very name "irrigation" has appeared to be synonymous with a viscious cycle of construction, nonoperation and again reconstruction.
write error.
has become idle.
builtin function.
nagoya.
if you look real closely.
parnaíba.
abandoning all efforts to resolve these dependencies.
the row number to attach the bottom of the child to.
component details.
swaziland.
if available horizontal space is bigger than needed for the child, how much of it to use for the child. 0.0 means none, 1.0 means all.
ambient.
their purpose is to modernize agriculture and provide incentives for increasing production.
material.
ancient greek musical notation.
cool link 3.
it is expected that the adoption of liberal economic policies will increase the growth rate of investment from the private sector.
therefore, it is highly essential to reduce the rate of population growth in order to achieve a sustainable economic growth rate.
hyères.
muscatine.
and don't expect many complete games by pitchers perhaps three out of 288 laughs mr. fingers the former oakland reliever.
trademark.
santa fe.
the two professors said the constitution authorizes the president to veto entire bills not partial measures.
applying pending operations.
a second drawback may be political.
remove, not used.
must start with an alphanumeric.
whether the child should receive extra space when the parent grows.
ushuaia.
failed to get configuration file path from.
dan droz leader of the carnegie-mellon group sees benefits all around.
when bell established that the berliner patent caveat was registered 10 days before edison 's application western union dropped the lawsuit and agreed never to enter the telephone business the basis for the company 's current plight.
cannot get folder.
image window appearance.
papers : backe group inc. agreed to acquire atlantic publications inc. which has 30 community papers and annual sales of $ 7 million.
file output.
key encipherment.
king salmon.
in love.
could not resolve.
reforms in development administration the increasing proportion of administrative cost in development investment and slow decision making processes have led delays in the projects implementation.
no significant education has been achieven in the growth rates of population and infant mortality.
africa/libreville.
in the past years the regular expenditure recorded an unprecedented high growth.
horizontally aligned zener diode.
multicast.
change.
entered the room.
not on list.
preview.
unlock.
user is offline.
because of the existing shortcomings, the second plan gave priority to activities which would the base for more comprehensive future plans.
georgian supplement.
inhibit power manager from suspending the machine while playing.
show list options.
about.
total provides mappings.
help.
africa/conakry.
could not open lock directory for to remove locks.
angular size gradient.
religion and morality must be instilled into children in the home, in the school and in the workplace.
reject the proposed changes and search for another solution.
part is missing.
case sensitive.
disable command line.
weslaco.
the senate plans to take up the measure quickly and is expected to pass it.
these two exposures alone represent a very substantial portion of cs first boston 's equity  moody 's said.
this methodology did not pay due at tention of the need to establish coordination between various internal and external variables.
main server.
specify a severalline description to go in a schema.
show line numbers.
must specify a key from which to get list element.
despite the gloomy forecast south korea has recorded a trade surplus of $ 71 million so far this year.
enable speech.
release here to close and finish the path.
got entries using filter.
no next zoom.
the golden share dates from jaguar 's public offering in 1984 and was designed to protect the company from takeover.
couldn't read arc info.
the spikes were poisoned! the poison was deadly more.
it was estimated that a post office at an average had provided service to 22,252 people within an area of 132 square miles.
object is not a stream.
find objects by the value of the id attribute exact or partial match.
failed to connect to smtp server in secure mode.
error reading magnification.
according to some estimates the rule changes would cut insider filings by more than a third.
petawawa.
and in each case he says a sharp drop in stock prices began within a year.
failed to rename ' to '.
horizontal tab border.
search your google docs files.
jpeg image.
round.
behavior.
default interpolation.
19th.
invalid message stream received from.
purge old appointments and meetings.
this has led to as increase in the current account deficit, too.
internal error, could not locate member.
window.
it would be a good idea to grow own vegetables at our backyard.
akureyri.
he says the 10 citizen-sparked issues on state ballots this fall represent the most in any odd-year this decade.
orientation.
the new york stock exchange 's attempt to introduce a new portfolio basket is evidence of investors ' desires to make fast and easy transactions of large numbers of shares.
can't convert output filename to locale encoding. please choose a different name to save with cairo.
too large for preview.
expects one argument.
object identifier.
constantine.
master.
include hidden objects in search.
languages.
it is true that a home is the first school of every child and the mother is the first teacher.
john bolton the assistant secretary of state for international organizations told congress that the continuing  statist restrictive nondemocratic  programs make rejoining any time soon  extremely unlikely.
list options.
create new image.
you can access the main window through the 'shell' variable.
aigen im ennstal.
the disadvantages of having pets relate mostly to responsibility of caring for them.
render lens flare.
above child.
the exchange also said that the 30-point circuit breaker which currently provides only a one-hour respite during market sell-offs will become the maximum one-day limit for the s&p 500 stock-index futures contract ; the one-day limit now is 50 index points.
generated content.
to assist the teaching staff for their higher studies and research.
use menu bar.
triton securities of danville calif. and a principal of the firm delwin george chase also of danville were jointly fined $ 10,000 and given 30-day suspensions as part of a settlement.
cursor coordinates.
they become nomads or refugees and are exposed to epidemic and starvation.
jump button.
the balanced development of all sectors in equally important in view if the governmentâ€™s commitment to rural development an d upliftment of the standard of living of the poor people.
block 4, 48.
reactor or absorption vessel, simple.
structural elements.
arkhangel'sk.
magnifier.
a file named already exists. do you want to replace it?
paper tile.
the percentage of lung cancer deaths among the workers at the west groton mass. paper factory appears to be the highest for any asbestos workers studied in western industrialized countries he said.
configure color display filters.
reed international a u.k. publishing group gained 15 to 397 despite reporting a 3.7  drop in interim pretax profit.
america/portauprince.
image header corrupt.
save the current file with a different name.
smudge tool smudge selectively using a brush.
program trading a wide range of computer-assisted portfolio trading strategies involving the simultaneous purchase or sale of 15 or more stocks.
mobile phone.
instant messaging contacts.
error reading mail file.
lyx document.
sign.
password.
when we evaluated raising our bid the risks seemed substantial and persistent over the next five years and the rewards seemed a long way out.
coordinate expression contains integer which could not be parsed.
go.
abakan.
in war, it is used as a weapon of destruction.
as a result of the increase in the consumption expenditure, the occurred a decline in gross domestic savings by 3.9 percent, thus bringing down thepercent to 6.1 in 1989/90.
whether this tag affects the foreground stipple.
create a sent item to track information.
to accommodate the additional cash assistance the house appropriations committee last week was required to reallocate an estimated $ 140 million from the pentagon.
today, as a result of technological advancements and conveniences, we tend to be inactive and lead sedentary lifestyles.
received 's public key. would you like to accept this public key?
do you want to recover unfinished messages?
canada's gross domestic product rose an inflation-adjusted 0.3  in august mainly as a result of service-industry growth statistics canada a federal agency said.
view debug messages.
no response necessary.
invalid filename.
host name not valid.
max depth.
terms were n't disclosed.
constrain.
what to do with the terminal when the child command exits.
set the calendar month.
content area border.
when the vertical scrollbar is displayed.
currently the rules force executives directors and other corporate insiders to report purchases and sales of their companies ' shares within about a month after the transaction.
goes to previous character.
it uses a base of 100 in 1985.
proxy server.
szolnok.
foreigners complain that they have limited access to government procurement in japan in part because japanese companies unfairly undercut them.
mrs. ward says that when the cheating was discovered she wanted to avoid the morale-damaging public disclosure that a trial would bring.
insert special characters into documents.
error was expected but none given.
failed to print document.
package configuration.
but although he thinks that it is hurting him he doubts it could be stopped.
address cards.
moses lake.
the nine of hearts.
select image file.
foodgrain production which stood at 3.152 million metric tones in 1961/62 reached only 5.698 million metric tones in 1989/90 with an average growth rate of 2.1 percent per annum only.
send public secure shell key to another machine, and enable logins using that key.
desktop trash icon name.
tooltip.
in champagne some of the prestige cuvees are inching toward $ 100 a bottle.
and recessionary environments are n't hospitable to the stock market.
transamerica said third-quarter investment gains were $ 10.2 million compared with $ 6.4 million the year earlier.
save color values from transparent pixels.
internal error, ordering didn't finish.
similarly rick wamre a 31-year-old asset manager for a dallas real-estate firm would like to see program trading disappear because  i ca n't see that it does anything for the market or the country.
small form variants.
lugano.
function header.
romanian.
adjust selected color.
remove this criterion from the search.
bonoboactivation configuration file contains.
guillotine.
instead we ought to be inviting more liquidity with cheaper ways to trade and transfer capital among all participants.
car phone.
are you sure you want to save the memo without a summary?
whether this tag affects the background stipple.
if the toggle button is in an "in between" state.
exploration of new methods of saving has been encouraged by removing the control of the central bank on the fixation of interest rates.
window selector.
calendar event summary is.
print preview.
cray research did not want to fund a project that did not include seymour.
color transformation.
unsupported operation.
lens effect.
pointer to local file.
as sublayer of current.
keyboard layout chart.
ronchi dei legionari.
america/caracas.
open a dialog to specify the color.
select date.
skip backwards.
not junk.
ponce.
the total sectoral demands for labour are primarily determined by the growth rates of production in various sectors.
therefore, it is highly essential to reduce the rate of population growth in order to achieve a sustainable economic growth rate.
alcantarilla.
show all processes.
click to mail.
tokyo stocks rebounded tuesday from two consecutive daily losses in relatively active dealings.
use all visible layers when shrinking the selection.
u.s. news has yet to announce its 1990 ad rates.
the sacramento-based s&l which has 44 branch offices in north central california had assets of $ 2.4 billion at the end of september.
previous message.
failed to write client add to saved state file.
for the attainment of accelerated economic development in the country, industrialization is equally as important as that of agriculture and other primary sectors.
the share of food products and raw materials in total import was 30.9 percent in f.y. 1990/91, which increased slightly to 3.6 perc ent in f.y 1991/92.
belize.
faster.
range high.
mr. stevens was executive vice president of this electric-utility holding company.
obsoletes.
pgp signature.
asia/qyzylorda.
changes the visibility of the toolbar in the current window.
the most common program-trading vehicles are futures contracts on standard & poor 's 500-stock index traded on the chicago mercantile exchange ; the major market index a 20-stock index that mimics the dow jones industrial average traded on the chicago board of trade ; and the s&p 100 options traded on the chicago board options exchange and based on 100 stocks selected from the s&p 500.
asia/tehran.
foreground color as a gdkcolor.
filmed in lovely black and white by bill dill the new york streets of  sidewalk stories  seem benign.
random saturation.
your system administrator has disabled this operation.
fill top to bottom.
received invalid color data.
organizational unit.
while the share of import was 13.1 percent in the gross domestic product (gdp) in fy 1964/65, it gradually increased to 20.2 percent in fy 1989/90 the export, however, showed only an insignificant increase during the same period period.
algeria.
america/indiana/knox.
raw gray sample.
in this regard, various steps were taken to achieve a regular and convenient supply of the essential commodities for the common people such as foodgrains, salt, sugar and cement.
it 's probably true that many salarymen put in unproductive overtime just for the sake of solidarity that the system is so hierarchical that only the assistant manager can talk to the manager and the manager to the general manager and that sony was chary of letting a young short-term american employee take on any responsibility.
unique identifier for the window to be used when restoring a session.
settings saved to.
criminal charges were filed against diceon electronics inc. and two company officials alleging waste disposal violations in its chatsworth calif. facility.
line width.
load the curves from a file.
pierre.
medium building.
broken.
select subtitle font.
stabilize.
standard business application.
the seven of clubs.
show or hide the canvas rulers.
family disputes and lack of proper affection of their parents also lead children to town and join hard labour.
miscellaneous message.
the potential sales are nearly $ 9.3 million and house majority whip william gray d. pa began the bidding this year by proposing language that the quota be allocated to english-speaking countries of the caribbean such as jamaica and barbados.
temporary authentication failure.
abstract ?
offset of text above the baseline below the baseline if rise is negative.
editor.
updated packages.
linux psf console font.
clipped to image.
he said the company is experimenting with the technique on alfalfa and plans to include cotton and corn among other crops.
directory information file.
sustainable economic growth b.
beyond need, there is also the allure of tradition for some who go abroad.
do not exit.
gaussian blur.
this task recurs.
blending.
user  last password change in the future.
boundary.
croatian.
big mainframe computers for business had been around for years.
if true, the child appears in a secondary group of children, suitable for, e.g., help buttons.
los mochis.
error setting schema for '.
contents.
whether this tag affects the language the text is rendered as.
for this purpose the government will remove the policy obstacles and hindrances being faced by these organizations and adopt promotional policies.
brighten.
cell background color name.
attachments.
sen. danforth and others also want the department to require additional safety equipment in light trucks and minivans including air bags or automatic seat belts in front seats and improved side-crash protection.
error unsetting '.
invert.
the events of april through june damaged the respect and confidence which most americans previously had for the leaders of china.
java source code.
texinfo.
libgrx font.
2.2 tourism new trekking routes were opened in mustang and manang regions in the two 1990/91 and 1991/92 fiscal years.
staples.
key agreement failed.
error loading diagrama valid dia file defines at least one layer.
asia/dubai.
the vast majority of the u.s. corn crop now is grown from hybrid seeds produced by seed companies.
the level of total expenditure in gross domestic product was at 5 percent in 1964/65, which reached 22 percent in 1989/90.
thus, majority of the people in the country are as yet deprived from an access to hygienic supply of water in spite of the fact that expansion of drinking water facility had taken place in the past.
reflective.
edge.
force quit.
is the cursor visible in this rich text item?
this figure remained at 2.9 percents at current prices and 1.8 percent at constant prices in 1989/90.
search for and replace text.
croatia.
perspective clone does not operate on indexed layers.
all information on this memo will be deleted and can not be restored.
squares.
america/mazatlan.
randomize the vertical shift by this percentage.
makepackageview error in arguments  bad column list for static item.
incompatible protocol version.
load curve points from file.
the task list is not marked for offline usage.
both sides are taking action.
color enhance.
kansas.
in fact  the market has always tanked.
mask.
please enter your name and email address below. the "optional" fields below do not need to be filled in, unless you wish to include this information in email you send.
newberry.
volume up.
it 's made only in years when the grapes ripen perfectly the last was 1979 and comes from a single acre of grapes that yielded a mere 75 cases in 1987.
mapping.
root privileges are required for running gparted.
not currently playing.
part size is far too large or is not positive.
error creating signal pipe.
export graphics size.
despite the strong evidence against mrs. yeargin popular sentiment was so strong in her favor mrs. ward says that  i 'm afraid a jury would n't have convicted her.
the almost unsustainable upward trend in negative savings appears to have gained impetus during the last decade of the panchayat regime and the main contributing factor for this is a great increase in the unproductive and consumption expenditure of the public sector.
display.
left the room.
calendar properties.
seek backwards.
wait.
the page increment of the adjustment.
service type.
looking for data files.
this growth rate is higher than that of the last three decades.
target.
in view of the government financial situation of the last two years, the reliance on external loans has further accentuated instead of declining because of the need for adjusting the financial deficit caused by increasing government expenditure.
display the previous unread message.
line spacing.
sets the size of the thumbnail shown in the open dialog.
oliver berliner beverly hills calif.
a spokesman for the stamford conn.based company said operations had a loss of $ 5.5 million for the quarter ; in addition the loss was magnified by nonrecurring charges totaling $ 23.5 million and $ 8.2 million in asset-valuation adjustments that he described as  unusual.
refresh the preview window.
message could not be sent, not allowed while invisible.
create an image from an area of the screen.
maybe it was n't enough  a finance ministry official noted after the dec. 7 surge.
opens up the size map editor.
toolbar.
assignment operator.
html page.
this increase, again, was due mainly to the expansion in the agricultural land reather than an increase in productivity or the use of agricultural inputs.
not included on the most-likely-successor list are joni evans recruited two years ago to be publisher of adult trade books for random house and sonny mehta president of the prestigious alfred a. knopf unit.
alternate the rotation direction for each column.
create rectangle.
gradient flare.
wrap.
to attain this purpose, it will be essential especially to curtail the unproductive government expenditure, to increase the work efficiency of public undertakings, to monitor the price situation on a regular basis, to emphasize on the attainment of equilibrium in foreign trade and to improve the supply and distribution systems of essential commodities.
status tracking.
enable dithering of transparency.
determine file type.
the selected opacity value 0 fully transparent, 65535 fully opaque.
degrees.
asia/taipei.
an analysis of the economic changes brought about by the planned development efforts in the past in presented below.
exponent.
at st. mary 's church in ilminster somerset the bells have fallen silent following a dust-up over church attendance.
total slack space.
telex.
show zoom percentage.
iron mountain.
someone always makes you quit  says legendary st. louis cardinals centerfielder curt flood the league's commissioner.
at the same time he began building up the pulp and paper segment of the company while refocusing building products on home repair and remodeling rather than materials for new-home construction.
directory to add to configuration file.
they have n't forgotten the leap in share prices last dec. 7 when the first bout of foreign-led index arbitrage drove stocks skyward in the last half-hour of trading startling regulators who thought they had written enough rules to prevent such a swing.
parents must be vigilant and know the whereabouts of their children all the time.
preview of package installation.
default charset in which to compose messages.
file selection options.
the fast-food company said its decision was based *-1 on discussions with a shareholder group giant group ltd.  in an effort to resolve certain disputes with the company.
another gimp instance is already running.
select files to open.
error while dumping resolver state.
mech. energy.
at the same time, the election of local bodies was also completed.
certificate signer.
log in anyway.
delete package files which can no longer be downloaded.
convert to indexed using bitmap default settings do it manually to tune the result.
flip horizontal.
nomura was attempting to organize the 50 billion-yen -lrb- $ 352 million -rrb- borrowing in japan at a time when many japanese banks led by industrial bank of japan were pressuring the wellington government to help them recover loans made to a defunct investment bank that had been owned by new zealand's civil-service pension fund.
output.
the october survey of corporate purchasing managers as expected provided evidence that economic growth remains subdued.
senegal.
internal error getting a package name.
pending operations.
media player keys.
whether the warning dialog in development versions of evolution is skipped.
the only fraud involved cry mr. courter 's partisans is the florio commercial itself and so the courter campaign has responded with its own pinocchio commercial produced by mr. ailes.
calendar view for one or more weeks.
length of step buttons at ends.
westerly.
orientation.
remove the eights.
the rockford ill. maker of fasteners also said it expects to post sales in the current fiscal year that are  slightly above  fiscal 1989 sales of $ 155 million.
it is necessary to have a short evening walk before you go to bed.
delete handle.
fill bottom to top.
embedded.
reduce saturation.
in addition to administrative reform, land reforms were started during the second plan.
abort and quit.
spatial oversample.
invalid archive member header.
wall street 's new guard is n't likely to take all this lying down for long however.
the best way to explore the kathmandu valley is on a mountain bike.
a shorter label that may be used on toolbar buttons.
multiplexer.
in fact, there are many cases of how disabled personalities have done themselves proud by being their own bosses.
one page selected.
image windows.
unable to create.
documents.
indeed analysts say that payouts have sometimes risen most sharply when prices were already on their way down from cyclical peaks.
, portrait.
light 2.
's music.
they also lack the time to bond with their family members, and relatives.
upgraded.
solomon islands.
warning is an old format file.
volume mute.
therefore, the data that require comparison with national income could be made use of only from the year 1964/65 onwards.
you have no personal pgp keys that can be used to sign a document or message.
how the range should be updated on the screen.
although the gr owth rate which appears in the structure of domestic product will be only marginal and the agricultural sector continues to hold the major share up to the end of the plan period, these changes will certainly contribute to the creation of new employment opportunities and an accelerated growth in the nonagricultural production.
your oct. 13 page-one story on the renewed plight of western union says that western union had lost its chance to be in the telephone business by turning down alexander graham bell 's offer to it of his invention because it supposedly felt that voice communication would never replace the telegraph.
the study by the backer spielvogel bates ad agency also found that the colony 's consumers feel more pressured than those in any of the other surveyed markets which include the u.s. and japan.
tool to switch between visible windows.
next window.
minimum interval in milliseconds.
no name.
moniker activation timed out.
copying file from.
sources of investment out of the total fixed capital investment of rs. 170,323 million, 56.3 percent (rs. 95,977 million) will be borne thought national savings.
could not start sendmail.
mr. katzenstein certainly would have learned something and it 's even possible mr. morita would have too.
she became an abortionist accidentally and continued because it enabled her to buy jam cocoa and other war-rationed goodies.
hungary.
search results.
by reverting the image to the state saved on disk, you will lose all changes, including all undo information.
minute the workday ends on, 0 to 59.
modify hue channel.
left arrow.
necessary physical facilities and communication services complementary to aviation were unavailable in several airfields.
in washington house aides said mr. phelan told congressmen that the collar which banned program trades through the big board 's computer when the dow jones industrial average moved 50 points did n't work well.
a detailed analysis reveals that there occurred a fundamental directional change in regular expenditure from the fiscal year 1974/75.
select all the text in a text field.
moniker interface cannot be found.
second it can be used to unwind positions before u.s. trading begins but at prices pegged to the previous session 's big board close.
go forward one page.
goes to previous blockquote.
in order to create employment opportunities at an accelerated rate, all possible avenues have been explored in the sectoral programmes.
although preliminary findings were reported more than a year ago the latest results appear in today 's new england journal of medicine a forum likely to bring new attention to the problem.
you should use only one list dialog type.
money is an important exchange for food, shelter and clothing.
j.p. bolduc vice chairman of w.r. grace & co. which holds a 83.4  interest in this energy-services company was elected a director.
empty trash folders on exit.
could not remove cache entry.
while the foreign assistance contributed 37.4 percent of total development expenditure in 1972/73, the figure increased to 61.1 percent in 1989/90.
command macro.
according to this methodology :.
flin flon.
due emphasis has been given on the reinforcement of the present financial system in order to further mobilize savings in the private sector.
it has been proved that family planning devices are being used only in areas with the spread of literacy among women and with easy access to primary health facilities, and in families with high standard of living.
select page.
few people think mr. spiegel wants to run a bread-and-butter thrift which current rules would force columbia to become.
could not read file.
still people, contractors and even government agencies have been denuding forests.
revenue rose 42  to $ 133.7 million from $ 94 million.
reload current archive.
new products have not been successfully identified as yes for export promotion programmes.
image file.
coordinate expression parser overflowed its buffer.
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, droughts, tidal waves, tsunamis, fires, landslides, and avalanches.
cape girardeau.
why did n't you mention the ymca or the ywca or catholic charities usa or a hundred other nonprofit organizations that participated in the march ?
america/guadeloupe.
ambient.
open location.
detroit lakes.
the calendar attached contains multiple items.
disable loading of any plugins.
unknown character, unable to identify.
but for now they 're looking forward to their winter meeting boca in february.
could not create message.
add the current folder to the bookmarks.
lower saxony.
polygon.
interpolate.
empty trash.
user temporarily unavailable.
copy to folder.
enable nonfatal debugging signal handlers.
norrköping.
click the eyedropper, then click a color anywhere on your screen to select that color.
lanzhou.
descending.
you should explicitly select one to install.
cell background set.
and expect slower fastballs.
development is not merely a mechanical function of capital and technology but it is also a social and political process of mobilizing and organizing people commensurate with the desired goals.
cranfield.
keywords.
queensland.
workgroup 5002.
same page.
click selection to toggle scale/rotation handles.
france.
given that choice associates of mr. hahn and industry observers say the former university president who has developed a reputation for not overpaying for anything would fold.
display progress indication dialog.
northeast.
removing trusted key.
care can at times play the good samaritan and helps the neighbors in a small or big way.
africa/mbabane.
many medicines, foods, natural insecticides and oil producing trees are found in the rainforest.
mr. steinberg he suggested could replace british airways plc which has withdrawn from the buy-out group.
big spring.
base station.
they know he is generally opposed to cop-killer bullets but that he had some reservations about the language in the legislation.
florianópolis.
without admitting or denying wrongdoing they consented to findings that they failed to return funds owed to customers in connection with a limited-partnership offering.
separate.
display the previous important message.
browser default.
if set to true, then nautilus will ask for confirmation when you attempt to delete files, or empty the trash.
toggles whether the status field is displayed.
he sold his exchange seat and wrote a bitter letter to big board chairman john j. phelan jr. in which he said the big board is too focused on machines rather than people.
in the same vein, it is necessary to develop and extend small irrigation systems that conform to the country's physiographic and cause minimum adverse impact on the environment.
indian/antananarivo.
visible.
these small but influential floor brokers long have earned fat returns of 30  to 40  a year on their capital by virtue of their monopoly in making markets in individual stocks.
overdue tasks color.
remove group.
hohenems.
overlay.
california led the nation with $ 6.5 billion in net cash income last year followed by texas $ 3.9 billion *u* ; iowa $ 3.4 billion ; florida $ 3.1 billion ; and minnesota $ 2.7 billion.
about 160 workers at a factory that made paper for the kent filters were exposed to asbestos in the 1950s.
use the system default fonts.
load images.
motion blurring.
europe/dublin.
status.
private dirty.
now  says joseph napolitan a pioneer in political television  the idea is to attack first last and always.
failed to activate.
preprocessor directive.
total space accounted for.
trace a route to a network address.
grid type.
testing pipeline.
primary partition.
savonlinna.
expunging deleted messages.
valkenburg.
show public key.
morogoro.
jim enzor of atlanta defends program trading because he believes that it can bring the market back up after a plunge.
software updates.
wednesday.
spraying device.
new mexico.
pans the braille display to the left.
failed to parse saved session file.
burundi.
for example campbell is a distant third in the u.k. frozen foods market where it recently paid 24 times earnings for freshbake foods plc and wound up with far more capacity than it could use.
viewed on the basis of cost factor, it seems appropriate to give more emphasis in the construction of small and medium scale hydro electric projects than on iarge scale projects.
comparative advantages can be achieved by the utilization of low cost hydro-electricity and other natural resources in the production process.
check box.
in the increasing crowd we forgot to enjoy nature and improve health.
the number of foreign tourist arrival which stood at 279,747 in f.y. 1990/91 increased by 7.8 percent to 301, 496 in f.y. 1991/92.
update.
markup column.
sv4 cpip archive with crc.
pictures.
refine.
small business.
keyboard shortcut to switch to the previous tab.
messrs. brownell and kean say they are unaware of any efforts by mcgraw-hill to modify or discontinue scoring high.
copy.
automatic orientation.
randomize.
nomura started a credit-card venture with american express co. that allowed cardholders to use their nomura securities accounts like a bank account attracting the wrath of banks.
please enter the name of the user you wish to be able to contact you.
system volume.
open the audio mixer.
susan del signore head trader at travelers investment management co. says critics are ignoring  the role the -lcb- takeover stock -rcb- speculator is taking in the market as a source of volatility.
in this connection, the regular budget will be streamlined in respect of government expenditure, revenue will be increased through appropriate monetary and fiscal policies the growth rate of money supply will be maintained within desirable limits and efforts will be made to increase exports through product diversification.
sensor  top.
help message.
2 tourism while 7,750 tourists came to nepal in f.y. 1961/62, this number reached 246, 361 in 1989/90 with its average annual growth rate of 13.1 percent.
only on this workspace.
west bend.
crouched at shortstop bert campaneris once oakland's master thief effortlessly scoops up a groundball and flips it to second.
parent has not been defined.
external tools.
curl layer.
he stretched out an arm and grabbed hold of her handbag, hitting her on the back at the same time.
deselect all files.
a person with sound knowledge of english can get great academic achievement in his career.
secure.
error loading theme.
workspace.
kill.
constructing tileable maze using prim's algorithm.
randomly slide some pixels downward similar to melting.
when you drive through the highway, you can see the river roaring bellowing.
star preferences.
completed date is wrong.
default appearance in fullscreen mode.
has retroactively denied your request to add them to your list for the following reason.
reliance acquired a 7  ual stake early this year at an average cost of $ 110 a share and reduced its stake to 4.7  after ual accepted the bid at prices higher than $ 282 a share.
select background image.
visible attributes.
but to be a good citizen requires a lot of training and understanding.
failure during recursive unset of.
tonga.
terminal bell.
minimize the window.
click here to add an attendee.
foreground.
the ailing company which has reported net losses for 16 consecutive quarters said it wo n't manufacture network computer systems any more and will greatly reduce its costly direct sales force.
it 's not a sound thing ; there 's no inherent virtue in it.
the eight h plan policies have been so formulated that they will promote the sustainable growth of large as well as cottage industries.
/buddies/new instant message.
excessive control and regulation : the control-oriented development approach of the past created many problems.
read only file system.
delete corner.
couldn't read group extend.
suggest.
africa/douala.
softglow.
america/grandturk.
string.
class scope static.
new products have not been successfully identified as yes for export promotion programmes.
sent.
groton.
opinions vary particularly between sight and hearing.
this is explained by the aims of education.
sen. kennedy said in a separate statement that he supports legislation to give the president line-item veto power but that it would be a  reckless course of action  for president bush to claim the authority without congressional approval.
horizontal color.
the defense lawyers ' group formed a task force this week chaired by new york attorney gerald lefcourt to deal with the matter.
export snippets.
show brush outline.
name too long.
fog in the vicinity.
activate save mode.
enter password for.
clear highlighting of search matches.
but it also provided him with forests, the source of wood.
time data.
card themes.
searching by help.
tasks.
page size.
the industrial production is estimated to have risen by 15.7 percent in f.y. 1991/92.
alias buddy.
click here for the address book.
window menu.
error reading file.
tools.
invalid problem report.
santa ana community redevelopment agency calif. $ 107 million of tax allocation bonds 1989 series a-d due 1991-1999 2009 and 2019 tentatively priced by a donaldson lufkin & jenrette securities corp. group to yield from 6.40  in 1991 to 7.458  in 2019.
error while reading arrowhead.
windsor.
pixelize.
make keyboard selection commands work on objects in all layers.
only support csv or vcard format.
meridian national corp. said it sold 750,000 shares of its common stock to the mcalpine family interests for $ 1 million or $ 1.35 a share.
not busy there are no mounted logical partitions.
memory.
exploration of new methods of saving has been encouraged by removing the control of the central bank on the fixation of interest rates.
name too long.
attribute data.
ascending.
their books are written in idiomatic contemporary language and usually carry hefty dashes of americana.
under cursor.
these efforts will br ought stability to national economy and encourage private sector to increase inv estment in productive activities.
think about what causes the difference in prices between the two markets for s&p 500 stocks usually it is large investors initiating a buy or sell in chicago.
minimum time between emptying the trash on exit, in days.
paint edges.
the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks.
netscape certificate type.
a house aide suggested that mr. phelan was so  vague and mushy  that it was the kind of meeting where people of all viewpoints could  come out *-2 feeling good.
unhappiness results when we are denied the above.
yet many such managers consistently fail to even keep up with much less beat the returns of standard benchmarks like the s&p not surprisingly old-style money managers have been losing clients to giant stock-index funds that use computers to juggle portfolios so they mirror the s&p 500.
make all warnings fatal.
in the present era, cinema is getting replaced by small screen productions.
the formula has paid off so far.
the message's date will be compared against the current time when filtering occurs.
close this program.
font name.
performing loans.
use size in label.
registration required.
month view horizontal pane position.
new passphrase.
this message is not encrypted. its content may be viewed in transit across the internet.
insert at cursor position.
error while parsing stylesheet.
the file resides on another machine called  and may not be available to this program. are you sure that you want to select it?
pixbuf for open expander.
disable print setup.
the products of the intermarriages are very unique as they have friends and relatives from both ethnic backgrounds.
statistics from 12 countries which normally account for 94  of non-communist europe 's passenger car sales showed new car registrations totaled 911,606 in september down 21  from august and down 4.2  for the year to date.
provides cannot be broken.
the key you selected could not be removed. please report this as a bug.
images over this size in bytes won't be thumbnailed. the purpose of this setting is to avoid thumbnailing large images that may take a long time to load or use lots of memory.
move contacts to.
image size.
the previous record was $ 57.7 billion in 1987 according to the agriculture department.
tuscaloosa.
the methods of war were simple.
in all the company hopes to repay $ 45 million in debt through the sales which will completely discharge its secured debt the company said.
when true, toolitem proxies for this action are represented in the toolbar overflow menu.
when enabled, this will ensure that the full image is visible after a file is opened, otherwise it will be displayed with a scale of 11.
could not parse as an integer.
watsonville.
first constitution has signed a merger agreement with wfrr l.p. and ghkm corp. under which all of its common shares will be acquired for $ 25 each or $ 273.5 million.
interrupt from keyboard.
the users associations and committees will be mandatorily involved in the co, lection of water fees in order to instill selfreliance in projects to be operated at the government level and under joint management.
i myself was a skeptic a few years ago.
previous character.
exit without save.
simulate a cartoon by enhancing edges.
in fact he liberated the u.s. from one of the world 's most corrupt organizations unesco.
as per the 2011 census, 123 languages are spoken in nepal.
failed to load image information.
name by which this document is formally known.
receiving as.
enontekiö.
decompose.
returns.
wa  is japanese for  team spirit  and japanese ballplayers have miles and miles of it.
heavy sandstorm.
out of memory for new cleanup entry.
bricks an estimated requirement of 8,800 million bricks for the eighth plan is exp ected to be met by the production of the industries in the public as well as private sectors.
carolina.
they are ecosystems whose formation and characteristics are determined by water.
minimum days between emptying the junk on exit.
the specified movie could not be found.
cannot call command.
border relief.
thumbnail of.
guangdong.
suspend the system.
among 33 men who worked closely with the substance 28 have died more than three times the expected number.
randomize the picked value by this percentage.
the restaurant operator said it has redeemed its rights issued monday under its shareholder rights plan.
coincident with the talks the state department said it has permitted a soviet bank to open a new york branch.
width, in pixels, of the focus indicator line.
it is easy to see why the ancient art is on the ropes.
file extension.
hartford.
havre.
but analysts say asian cooperation is n't likely to parallel the european common market approach.
authentication mechanism is too weak.
news print during the eighth plan period, the demand for newsprint in estimated to be 18,000 metric tons the entire demand is expected to be met through import.
message of the day.
complex number.
check to make sure your password is spelled correctly and that you are using a supported login method. remember that many passwords are case sensitive your caps lock might be on.
foreign prime rates : canada 13.50  ; germany 9  ; japan 4.875  ; switzerland 8.50  ; britain 15.
you 'd see her correcting homework in the stands at a football game.
meanwhile stations are fuming because many of them say the show 's distributor viacom inc. is giving an ultimatum : either sign new long-term commitments to buy future episodes or risk losing  cosby  to a competitor.
noting disappearance of which has been completely replaced.
don't become root.
alphabetical list.
political decisions were often autocratic and feudalistic.
object code.
vergent type.
penn yan.
a second ship is now expected to be delivered late next year or early in 1991.
would like permission to see when you are online.
during the period of 1961/62 and 1989/90, while the are3a covered by the cereal crops increased at the rate of 2.2 percent per annum, production of principal cereal crops increased at an average of 2.1 percent per annum.
edit path attributes.
select a file.
now unesco apologists are lobbying president bush to renege on president reagan's decision to depart.
therefore, it is necessary to pay attention to the task of constructing link road to district headquarters and other feeder roads on the basis of economic feasibility studies and also to the repairs and maintenance of old roads.
change the height of the window to height.
show pointer for paint tools.
pacific/midway.
fees 1 3/4.
invalid field.
drag anchor.
view available packages and choose actions to perform.
upgrade packages.
writing new source list.
is not a valid folder.
change passphrase.
column headers respond to click events.
the treasury will raise $ 10 billion in fresh cash by selling $ 30 billion of securities including $ 10 billion of new three-year notes and $ 10 billion of new 10-year notes.
because many of these subskills the symmetry of geometrical figures metric measurement of volume or pie and bar graphs for example are only a small part of the total fifth-grade curriculum mr. kaminski says the preparation kits would n't replicate too many if their real intent was general instruction or even general familiarization with test procedures.
tools for software development.
unminimize.
it would be a good idea to set up cooperatives to cater to consumers' needs.
there is no path to transform.
fallback window manager deprecated.
the new company will attempt to limit the shipyard 's losses participants said.
but the problem lies with the human resources.
millimeter.
setting mailbox file permissions.
images.
although poverty is the result of diverse factors, the basic causes of poverty in nepal are the dependence of the increasing population on limited economic resources and low rate of economic growth.
goes to previous list.
some data has been changed!
horizontal shift per row in  of tile width.
show options to modify properties of a window.
playback.
this movement experienced a misfortune when it turned into a process of the selection of workers, replacing the election system, masquerading as unanimity.
trace no active document.
cheyenne.
the date the file was modified.
image height is larger than gimp can handle.
hence, the emphasis on healthy lifestyle should start at a young age.
all information on this task will be deleted and can not be restored.
schaffen.
north platte.
with prices soaring they were able to sell the reclaimed commodities at  considerable profit  the agency 's 240-page report said.
discard changes.
failed to link to.
natchez.
speculation about coniston has caused the stock to rebound from a low of $ 145.
if false, don't allow to enter strings other than the chosen ones.
shade the window.
if you do not send a cancelation notice, the other participants may not know the meeting is canceled.
digital crossconnect.
revenue declined 8  to $ 85.7 million from $ 93.3 million a year earlier.
glens falls.
a doctor may conduct a medical examination to gauge whether a patient is healthy.
we 're talking about years ago before anyone heard of asbestos having any questionable properties.
web site.
it is used in meatpacking sausage-making and fish-curing both for seasoning and as a preservative.
editable.
font style set.
priority text beside icons.
y align.
suggested packages.
system folders are required for evolution to function correctly and cannot be renamed, moved, or deleted.
to increase agricultural production and productivity by improving the man agreement of existing irrigation systems to bring about increased reliability in irrigation management.
ncr corp. unveiled two models of its tower line of midrange computers and introduced advanced networking software to allow the tower family to operate as a central hub in a network of computers.
cannot get server information.
remove the aces.
how 's that again ?
s/mime file.
select module folders.
now it is possible to move information with the speed of light across the globe.
yesterday the stock market rose strongly creating a more defensive attitude among precious metals traders he said.
capture.
/ resolving dependencies.
control pictures.
add in out data port.
long straight road section.
an analysis conducted on the basis of the current extent of available foreign aid indicates that extensive improvements in work performance and considerable increase in domestic savings must be achieved in order to further increase the economic growth rate.
unicode category.
water action.
for this purpose, the advanced technology and institutional reforms will be made indispensable tools of support to the private sector and organizations down to the village level and production will be increased on the basis of equity and capability.
set initial percentage.
coordinate expression results in division by zero.
levels tool adjust color levels.
failure to commence the construction or the need to defer construction of projects included in the seventh plan like babai, sikta and others in want of funding source.
fagernes.
not downloaded.
expert mode.
select range.
timex had requested duty-free treatment for many types of watches covered by 58 different u.s. tariff classifications.
device.
there was n't.
minnesota.
click to anchor the floating selection.
search images.
internal error default column string is unparsable.
convolution matrix.
in an joint interview yesterday both men said they would like to be the company 's next chief executive.
visible comments.
hardware device volume.
expected text or optional element found instead.
total investment is fixed by the extent of external and internal savings, and thus in turn, by the supply of investment resources too.
following its introduction, the commercial banks have begun foreign exchange transactions at open market exchange rate for payments to these sectors.
personal.
rename the current layer.
views.
texarkana.
no objects found.
crop.
check folder sizes and available disk space.
stocks boosted by market-makers shopping to cover book requirements in ft-se 100 shares included carlton communications which climbed 32 to 778.
kemerovo.
on thursday the house approved a labor-backed amendment that would require the transportation department to reject airline acquisitions if the person seeking to purchase a carrier had run two or more airlines previously that have filed for protection from creditors under chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy code.
according to reports carried by various news services the brazilian government told its sugar producers that they wo n't be allowed to export sugar during the current 1989-90 season which began may 1 and the 1990-91 season so that it can be used to produce alcohol for automobile fuel.
important.
/tools/room list.
because of their longstanding rivalry gm just  wants to make sure ford pays a huge packet for -lrb- jaguar -rrb-  said john lawson an auto analyst at london 's nomura research institute.
revenue surplus it is estimated that total revenue will increase by 19.7 precent at current prices and 3.9 percent at constant prices in 1989/901991/92 period.
to the extent they did their concern was to ensure fiscal accountability.
asia/yerevan.
null external module directory name. modules will not be loaded.
channel cipher.
yahoo! home screen name 2.
america/phoenix.
puerto maldonado.
special attention will be paid to protect private sector participation on various economic activities.
i was dumbfounded  mrs. ward recalls.
in the future.
now reading material is available for all tastes.
rescan gradients.
sources of investment out of the total fixed capital investment of rs. 170,323 million, 56.3 percent rs. 95,977 million will be borne thought national savings.
science has changed the whole concept of war.
africa/djibouti.
exclusion.
lower border.
search backwards.
scores.
but the most important source of points was student improvement on tests.
the big three auto makers said the rule changes were n't surprising because bush administration officials have long said they planned to impose car safety standards on light trucks and vans.
the title of the window.
failed to open file.
that proposal had been hailed by environmentalists but despised by utilities because they feared it would limit their growth.
editing profile.
update free/busy.
error obtaining new value for ' after change notification from backend '.
dia version compiled.
remove duplicates.
lighting effects.
nature presents in its loneliness many beautiful and refreshing scenes.
debug.
module folders.
depends on.
netmask / prefix.
authors list.
society has to play its part as well.
bcc field.
failed to encrypt no valid recipients specified.
fix seed.
detroit $ 130 million of general obligation distributable state aid bonds due 1991-2000 and 2009 tentatively priced by a chemical securities inc. group to yield from 6.20  in 1991 to 7.272  in 2009.
shade.
couldn't parse layout unknown view item type.
barge rates on the mississippi river sank yesterday on speculation that widespread rain this week in the midwest might temporarily alleviate the situation.
randomize the vertical scale by this percentage.
a total of 139 companies raised dividends in october basically unchanged from 138 a year ago s&p said wednesday.
whether this tag affects underlining.
replace partial transparency with the current background color.
yet, we have to take a realistic view at the other side of the argument.
market professionals said london has several attractions.
accessible layer.
logging in.
could not find master browser.
mr. van dover said the at&t team created the desired crystal changes by bombarding superconductor samples with neutrons a process that creates some radioactivity in the samples and may not be feasible for large-scale commercial use.
on the whole, the government policy could neither act as a catalyst nor contribute in leading the country towards industrialization.
edit attributes.
whether to use the system font.
receiving options.
notification methods.
manhattan.
show the next page.
colorize.
the ypad.
satellite dish.
two harbors.
branch office.
in less parched areas meanwhile farmers who had little or no loss of production profited greatly from the higher prices.
signer.
events.
hardware address.
whether the selected font style is shown in the label.
against this, 2,789,000 students attended classes by april 1990 and this works out to be 80 percent of that age group.
nampula.
unhandled error.
attributes visible.
folder.
select a specific date.
warning weak password enter it again to use it anyway.
failed to read enough data from child pid pipe.
performing key exchange.
find previous.
remote server not found.
font points.
input methods.
most of us are prone to ordering deep fried food and oily dishes as opposed to steamed or baked food.
the host could not be found.
edge detection.
while loan realization in comparison to loan disbursement was 37.2 percent in 1974/75, the overdue portion of the outstanding loan gradually increased to 58 percent in 1989/90.
show tips.
producers have seen this market opening up and they 're now creating wines that appeal to these people.
do preview.
energy detection.
message buttons.
define circle/oval area.
the underwood family said that holders of more than a majority of the stock of the company have approved the transaction by written consent.
fatal parse error in pattern file  file appears truncated.
cannot remove group zero.
pages.
corba factory.
couldn't open for writing.
cursor visible.
fort wayne.
pantelleria.
blackpool.
no current or candidate version found for.
first of america said some of the managers will take other jobs with first of america.
a great area of land, with its trees, flora and fauna, farms and houses, has to be inundated.
they call it  photographic.
different strokes.
firebird.
why do road accidents occur ?
remote file.
unencrypted.
the components of industrial goods and foods and industrial raw materials in the total imports in that year were 71.3 percent and 28.7 percent respectively.
the ministry of international trade and industry summoned executives from the companies to  make sure they understood  the concern about such practices according to a government spokesman.
error creating folder.
the following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the u.s. and non-u.s. capital markets with terms and syndicate manager as compiled by dow jones capital markets report : international business machines corp. $ 750 million of 8 3/8  debentures due nov. 1 2019 priced at 99 to yield 8.467.
diagram menu.
path is closed.
projects yielding quick returns.
but consumers who buy at this level are also more knowledgeable than they were a few years ago.
go to the next visited location.
cinelerra editing sheet.
thus, in spite of the efforts mad for the development of road transport, several of the district headquarters od not have access to road.
package is not upgradable, cannot forbid an upgrade.
click to create a new path.
scriptfu cannot process two scripts at the same time.
scatter.
unknown.
thanks the evolution team.
connector network layout.
congo, republic of the.
could not rename folder.
expenditures incurred for the forest resources and botanical surveys, mineral exploration, surveys of irrigation and power potential and in the transport sector are in the respective departmental totals.
shearson lehman hutton inc. new york which is 62%-owned by american express co. consented to a $ 10,000 fine.
but in the three leading political contests of 1989 the negative ads have reached new levels of hostility raising fears that this kind of mudslinging empty of significant issues is ushering in a new era of campaigns without content.
file transfers.
each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant exercisable from nov. 30 1989 through nov. 2 1993 to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1/2  to the closing price when terms are fixed tuesday.
add filter rule.
print out the extension directory and exit.
17th.
luqa.
image has zero width.
japan 's domestic sales of cars trucks and buses in october rose 18  from a year earlier to 500,004 units a record for the month the japan automobile dealers ' association said.
configuration prefix where this application was installed.
yahoo! work screen name 1.
send to back.
this gave was to increasing poverty problem.
but the legislation reflected a compromise agreed to on tuesday by president bush and democratic leaders in congress after congressional republicans urged the white house to bend a bit from its previous resistance to compromise.
open link in.
peace river.
router with silicon switch.
as efforts aimed at raising the economic growth rate do not necessarily benefit the poor to a significant extent, special programmes will be undertaken for poverty alleviation at village level and household level.
error opening file.
spokane.
the concentration of heat through mirrors has again become important in the modern age.
empathy default download folder.
confirm passphrase.
africa/windhoek.
simple plugin.
start torrent.
a folder named already exists.
the present democratic government will do away with such tradition and effectively implement policies ofdecentralization in all sectors.
but as a result of various political and geographic conditions, nepal remained isolated behind other countries in its social and economic development.
posterize.
display in bottom pane.
thirdly, it does not help in the analysis of programmes and alternative policies, and in the assessment and formulation of these programmes and policies in the perspective of attaining total objective the techniques of macro-model have been employed in the formulation of the eighth plan.
volume down.
shows available bonobo components.
he said equitable hopes to eventually reduce its stake in younkers to less than 50.
packages that are partially installed these packages are not fully installed and configured an attempt will be made to complete their installation.
similarly, current account deficit increased at 32 percent per annum or by 64.5 times in 1989/90 in comparison to 1974/75.
makefile.
content switch.
side of the handlebox that's lined up with the docking point to dock the handlebox.
the person laughs with the films and tears with them.
width request.
many auto dealers now let car buyers charge part or all of their purchase on the american express card but few card holders realize this mr. riese says.
remove controller ?
although the growth rate of this sector in general has been marginally higher the that of the economy as a whole, some industrial units prospered as a result of protectionist policies.
shenandoah.
osmanya.
letter spacing.
speculation had it that the company was asking $ 100 million for an operation said * to be losing about $ 20 million a year but others said hearst might have virtually given the paper away.
cinema has remained the most powerful media for mass communication.
although the legislation would apply to acquisitions involving any major airline it is aimed at giving the transportation department the chance to review in advance transactions financed by large amounts of debt.
summing junction.
john william davis colonsville miss. fined $ 200,000 ; jeffrey gerard dompierre valrico fla. $ 5,000 and 10-day suspension ; eugene michael felten la canada calif. fined $ 25,000 ordered to disgorge $ 16,072 and suspended one year ; marion stewart spitler la canada fined $ 15,000 ordered to disgorge $ 18,444 and suspended six months.
if the toggle part of the button is displayed.
upgrade the following packages.
accessible table column description.
documents/numeric.
this growth rate is higher than that if the last three decades.
add a column.
internal error uid in invalid format.
child process failed.
no drawops provided for button.
cosine.
this has had detrimental effects on environmental balance as well as agricultural production.
please select an image for this contact.
spike length.
conversation.
pacific/johnston.
paused.
glass tile.
hue phaseshift.
height mismatch!
but some of the tv stations that bought  cosby  reruns for record prices two years ago are n't laughing much these days.
help browser.
semi-government organisations, users' committees, private sector and nongovernmental organisations will be encouraged to be involved in the construction of small irrigation projects.
the constitution is largely written in gender neutral term.
18th.
drug makers should n't be able to duck liability because people could n't identify precisely which identical drug was used.
during this period, as shown by the review, money supply m2 recorded an average annual growth of 17.7 percent.
maximum number of characters for this entry. zero if no maximum.
hence, the schoolstudent ration of 1961 increased from 1172 to 1187 by april 1990 and similarly, the teacherstudent ration changed from 115 to 135.
error writing to temporary file for  no file has been created.
inverted image.
an error has occurred.
australia/lindeman.
he was cradling the child and examining his limbs.
fourteen members of the house with jurisdiction over the eeoc have said they oppose mr. thomas 's nomination because of  serious questions about his judgment -lcb- and -rcb- respect for the law.
it was estimated that a post office at an average had provided service to 22,252 people within an area of 132 square miles.
therefore, in order to expand the export trade, due attention must be paid to the identification of new exportable products and the amelioration of quality standards of the export items.
clean obsolete files.
tuvalu.
ejector or injector.
adjustments will cause the current solution to be discarded and recalculated as necessary.
no matter who owns ps of new hampshire after it emerges from bankruptcy proceedings its rates will be among the highest in the nation he said.
you dismiss as  sentimental  the view that the reduction of federal housing-assistance programs by 77  might have played a significant role in the increased number of men and women sleeping on our city streets during the reagan-bush years.
the number of decimal places that are displayed in the value.
input devices.
this protocol does not support chat rooms.
download you must specify at least one package to download.
messages from.
observing that the judge  has never exhibited any bias or prejudice  mr. murray concluded that he  would be impartial in any case involving a homosexual or prostitute  as a victim.
the department proposed requiring stronger roofs for light trucks and minivans beginning with 1992 models.
the page size of the adjustment.
expected policy identifier, got.
arrangements will be made to clearly determine peopleâ€™s participation while implementing any project.
runlength encoded.
arraignments are scheduled for nov. 14.
the army corps is cutting the flow of the missouri river about two weeks earlier than normal because of low water levels in the reservoirs that feed it.
prepare the selected files to be copied with a paste command.
user information not available.
about.
debug window.
overlap.
whether this tag affects the cell background color.
color of grid lines.
error reading from server.
one was statewide school reform which raised overall educational funding and ushered in a new public spirit for school betterment.
lucille gorman an 84-year-old chicago housewife has become amazingly immune to stock-market jolts.
while planning any irrigation project, users will be involved in every step right from project initiation.
0 channels.
business phone.
when enabled, all paint tools will show a preview of the current brush's outline.
financial.
many tuition centers have a large enrolment.
â in the pas t, the nepalese economy remained considerably weak in matters of achieving higher economic growth rate and maintaining stability.
/conversation/close.
arbitrage does n't cause volatility ; it responds to it.
staroffice extended metafile image.
unknown option.
whether to allow multiple files to be selected.
make the shape a whole ellipse, not arc or segment.
headers.
permission denied.
expose.
closing path.
the specified mechanism is not supported by the provided credential, or is unrecognized by the implementation.
this is nonsense.
learn more about gnome.
development budget expenditures increase annually over the second plan period and represents, in monetary terms, improvements made in administrative efficiency and th4e absorptive capacity of nepal.
error writing session file.
falfurrias.
komatsu ltd. a large integrated maker of construction machinery posted a 32  unconsolidated gain in first-half pretax profit.
wedtech management used the merit system.
anonymous.
sherbrooke.
goes to next word.
drexel this year eliminated its retail or individual customer business cutting the firm 's workforce almost in half to just over 5,000.
if you were especially helpful in a corrupt scheme you received not just cash in a bag but equity.
netmask.
in other commodity markets yesterday : energy : crude oil futures prices increased in moderate trading but much of the action was in heating oil.
version 3.
style scheme description.
path attributes.
the fairlawn ohio-based company also said that full-year profit from continuing operations will be far below last year 's $ 148 million.
click to make this node angular.
number of columns.
hold.
area settings.
the philadelphia and cleveland districts for example reported declines in manufacturing activity while the boston dallas and san francisco banks noted that business expanded.
prevent the user from switching to another account while his session is active.
skipping it is already installed and upgrade is not set.
in the school context, it is the students who take the examinations.
therefore, there is a great need to achieve a consistent balance between the demand and the supply of timber and firewood by according priority to forestry development and by soliciting active participation of the people themselves in afforest ration activity.
type failed, server said.
blur parameters.
comment line length.
create new view.
that package now sells for about $ 2,099.
has resize grip.
width pixels.
cullman.
color with which to draw insertion cursor.
section.
output.
some sounds are jarring or unpleasant to the ear while some are pleasant.
change priority.
move up.
template in has a duplicate field with new valueprobably two templates are not properly separated by a lone newline.
mr. kaminski the schoolteacher and william mehrens a michigan state university education professor concluded in a study last june that cat test versions of scoring high and learning materials should n't be used in the classroom because of their similarity to the actual test.
zoom to 12.
save the current file with a different name.
deal another card.
step to next frame.
matching the spirit if the challenge, the government has been striving for reforms in economic management by according priority to liberal economic policies and rural areas.
event specification.
the remote user is not present in the network any more.
role.
get the name of the schema applied to this key.
mac woman.
the following packages have been automatically kept back.
none.
syntax error in object description.
unknown message.
piacenza.
color for transparent areas.
new richmond.
diagram tree.
decrease the text size.
the midwest financial subsidiary banks will continue to operate under their current names until early 1990 when each will adopt the first of america name.
permission denied.
create folder.
the colors are white and black.
september.
we can see plenty of reasons to stay out and none to rejoin unesco.
show license information and exit.
plugin manager.
do you really want to reset all preferences to default values?
confirm new passphrase.
value cannot be interpreted as a number.
installing file.
large icons and compression are not supported by all programs. older applications may not open this file correctly.
ringing does become a bit of an obsession  admits stephanie pattenden master of the band at st. mary abbot and one of england 's best female ringers.
the language this text is in, as an iso code. pango can use this as a hint when rendering the text. if not set, an appropriate default will be used.
server busy.
aurillac.
mechanical command by spring.
the 32  state-owned dsm had eight million guilders of extraordinary charges in the latest quarter mainly to reflect one-time losses in connection with the disposal of some operations.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 7.
clear hidden mines from a minefield.
include.
demultiplexer.
during the f.y. 1989/90-1991/92 period, the major crops recorded an increase of 0.1 percent wit h a decline of 0.7 percent in the production indices of major food crops and a 3.6 percent increase in cash crops.
fatal parse error in brush file  unknown gimp brush shape in line.
replicate selection.
click attribute to edit.
couldn't find standard objects when looking for objectlibs exiting.
double prime.
room number.
a spokeswoman for crum & forster said employees were told early this week that numerous staff functions for the personal insurance lines were going to be centralized as a cost-cutting move.
saintlouis.
mouse button orientation.
playing.
switching to the defense : a former member of the prosecution team in the iran/contra affair joined the chicago firm of mayer brown & platt.
the share of revenue surplus on gross domestic product remained at current prices at 3.0 percent in 1990/91 and 2.8 percent in 1991/92.
but in recent days columbia has edged up closing at 5 1/4 up 3/8 yesterday on revived speculation that the thrift might restructure.
failed to execute child process.
similarly, compared to the seventh plan, the investment share of industry, trade, hotel and restaurants and social services will also increase in the eight plan.
in a few weeks many barges probably wo n't be able to operate fully loaded south of st. louis because the u.s. army corps of engineers is beginning to reduce the flow of the missouri river which feeds into the mississippi river.
erzurum.
program trading money managers have gained control over a big chunk of the invested funds in this country and the pressures on such money managers to produce consistent profits has wedded them to the ability to move rapidly in and out the market that program trading gives them.
continue.
white on black.
regulate.
all files.
the fixed width.
the regional complementary interrelationships between the hills and the terai arising out of the existing agroecological conditional can be beneficially utilized for agricultural and industrial specialization.
playlist was empty.
not this year.
but is to be installed.
ssl client certificate.
break path at selected nodes.
13th.
unspecified.
gmac screened the card-member list for holders more than 30 years old with household incomes over $ 45,000 who had n't  missed any payments  the buick spokeswoman says.
example path.
that attracts attention  it was just another one of the risk factors  that led to the company 's decision to withdraw from the bidding he added.
conflicting options are present windows or workspaces of screen should be listed, but has been used.
check spelling.
malaysia.
page curl.
you may not import keys with this cipher.
disabled.
opening calendar.
msn work screen name 1.
the sale of southern optical is a part of the program.
number of mines.
muzzling provisions which might be called  blindfold laws  as well prevent the executive branch from even looking at certain policy options let alone from recommending them to congress.
parameters.
failed to get a lock.
many grain processors and exporters use the price of the corn futures contracts traded there to calculate the price they offer to buy corn from farmers.
the  one-yen  controversy first came to a head last week when the city of hiroshima announced that fujitsu won a contract to design a computer system to map its waterworks.
such program trades which can involve the purchase or sale of millions of dollars of stock occur in a matter of seconds.
display some available commands at the top of the screen.
previous.
jump to next song.
when writing files.
deal.
factory payrolls fell in september.
width, in pixels, between focus indicator and the widget 'box'.
bristol.
the impact sent the lady hurtling forward.
this year it is expected to be a net importer and is said to be seeking to buy about 200,000 tons of sugar to meet internal needs analysts said.
good citizen can be one whose civic sense is highly developed.
artist  number  title.
taiwan has improved its standing with the u.s. by initialing a bilateral copyright agreement amending its trademark law and introducing legislation to protect foreign movie producers from unauthorized showings of their films.
unterminated literal string after.
connection point click or drag to create a new connector.
futures contracts obligations to buy for those who have purchased a contract or deliver for those who sold one a quantity of the underlying commodity or financial instrument at the agreed-upon price by a certain date.
other major japanese computer companies contacted yesterday said they have never made such bids.
chesterfield inlet.
change the tile hue by this percentage for each column.
the almost unsustainable upward trend in negative savings appears to have gained impetus during the last decade of the panchayat regime and the main contributing factor for this is a great increase in the unproductive and consumption expenditure of the public sector.
the polish government increased home electricity charges by 150  and doubled gas prices.
objective irigation projects in the eighth plan will be implemented to achieve the following objectives 1.
the image file was not found.
source : telerate systems inc.
but the soviets might still face legal obstacles to raising money in the u.s. until they settle hundreds of millions of dollars in additional debt still outstanding from the world war ii lend-lease program.
install the following packages.
the recent explosion of country funds mirrors the  closed-end fund mania  of the 1920s mr. foot says when narrowly focused funds grew wildly popular.
do action.
unesco is now holding its biennial meetings in paris to devise its next projects.
bmp products may be useful in fracture healing and in treating bone loss associated with periodontal disease and certain cancers the company said.
far above in the belfry the huge bronze bells mounted on wheels swing madly through a full 360 degrees starting and ending surprisingly in the inverted or mouth-up position.
auctions held in october and those scheduled for next week will raise a total of $ 25.6 billion.
a little dart shoots out at you! you are hit by a little dart! more.
the event continues into next year and includes an exchange program to swap design teachers at carnegie-mellon and leningrad 's mutchin institute.
grid visibility and type.
unrecognized color name.
dynamic modules to load.
highlight.
gagetown.
the printer “” is out of paper.
industrial production showed and average increase of 7 percent per annum from the analysis of the production index of 18 principal industrial products from the period 1974/75 to 1989/90.
remove stroke.
diffuse.
11th to 20th.
failed to fetch some archives.
columns.
end game.
when completed.
goes to previous large object.
close tab.
gadugadu.
arnos vale.
my first fractal.
sets the browser used by the help system.
document metadata.
could not rename.
pc paintbrush image.
progressive rounds.
dan e. nelms valley federal 's president and chief executive officer said the one-time charge substantially eliminates future losses associated with the unit.
rhinelandpalatinate.
set permanent.
korean.
stack overflow.
click to select nodes, drag to rearrange.
while mrs. ward fired and restructured staff and struggled to improve curriculum mrs. yeargin worked 14-hour days and fast became a student favorite.
end process.
joão pessoa.
siloam springs.
make the window visible on all workspaces.
these factors limited, to a certain extent, the activities if the private sector.
collingwood.
pipeline.
such a countermove could end jaguar 's hopes for remaining independent and british-owned.
not allowed.
his interest is not stimulated neither is the require skill acquired.
expected pair, got.
transparency color.
subscribe to the mailing list this message belongs to.
mr. chase did n't return a telephone call to his office.
save playlist.
invalid byte sequence in conversion input.
the following issues were recently filed with the securities and exchange commission : intermec corp. offering of 1,050,000 common shares via goldman sachs & co. and piper jaffray & hopwood inc.
could not remove bookmark.
arrow y displacement.
check for new versions of packages.
preferences.
/sort diagrams/default.
simulate an antique engraving.
kuopio.
the dow jones industrial average finished less than a point higher to close at 2645.90 in moderate trading.
time zone.
check size.
installed.
sticky.
file cabinet.
economic growth rate, total investment and sectoral allocations macro economic bases of eighth plan consistency among objectives, policies, programmes and investment must be established in the course of formulating a plan.
html.
the board already has been searching for strong outside candidates including food-industry executives with considerable international experience.
package is not installed.
take screenshot.
are you sure you want to delete from the list and from disk?
quit message disconnect from the server, with an optional message.
they mature in 2005 2009 and 2029.
playlist.
link is both primary and slave.
is outdated dropping whole template!
whether animations should be displayed. note this is a global key, it changes the behaviour of the window manager, the panel etc.
the move boosts intelogic chairman asher edelman 's stake to 20  from 16.2  and may help prevent martin ackerman from making a run at the computer-services concern.
pratt.
by name.
image editor.
excess data in file.
upper hour.
in the absence of a competitive atmosphere, attention was not paid towards increasing efficiency.
deps.
require encryption.
edit flame.
maximum depth.
gross domestic product: owing to the low growth rate in gross domestic product in comparison with the high growth rate in population, the per-capita income recorded only a marginal increase during the period 1964/65 to 1989/90.
america/portovelho.
by signing you indicate your trust that this key belongs to.
even in terms of physical objectives the plan targets have, on the whole, been achieved.
font family.
enable smooth refresh.
you are not currently signed on with any protocols that have the ability to chat.
install.
europe/sanmarino.
row is an expander row, and is expanded.
send.
gradient segment's right endpoint color.
some files are missing in the package file group '.
channel information.
couldn't delete subkey.
make selected nodes symmetric.
arabic supplement.
previous solution.
make the current document fill the window width.
kivalina.
unparent.
alias chat.
suggest automatic display of attachment.
whether this tag affects line wrap mode.
sent messages folder.
thus, it is necessary to provide relief to the people by cutting down the rate of increase in prices.
what kind of problem do you want to report?
folder subscriptions.
wile for the lack of decentralization in real terms, many projects aimed at integrated rural development with international assistance could not deliver meaningful results, many projects, as the studies have revealed, created a negative outlook towards development at the local level.
thirdly, compared to the amount of loans sanctioned by foreign donor countries and agencies, their actual utilistation remained considerably low.
invalid group name.
an upjohn spokesman said he had  heard nothing  to suggest the early retirement package was spurred by shareholder pressure or a potential bidder for the company which occasionally has been the target of takeover speculation.
other paper and forest-products stocks closed mixed.
tuesday october 31 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions.
is used to notify that the table caption has changed.
delete partition.
darker.
move to trash.
today the pixie-like clarinetist has mostly dropped the missionary work -lrb- though a touch of the old tashi still survives -rrb- and now goes on the road with piano bass a slide show and a repertoire that ranges from light classical to light jazz to light pop with a few notable exceptions.
defaults.
orange.
unable to open spool folder.
class resource of the class group to examine.
yes/no in boolean field.
in fiscal 1989 elco earned $ 7.8 million or $ 1.65 a share.
upjohn co. said it will offer an early retirement package to as many as 1,100 employees in a cost-cutting move expected to result in a fourth-quarter charge.
in july the environmental protection agency imposed a gradual ban on virtually all uses of asbestos.
block 5, 33.
searching.
dual.
thus, the macroeconomic implications of total and sectoral investment outlay indicate that, provided the proposed policies and programmes are effectively implemented in time, they will be able to contribute in constantly raising the economic growth rate, maintaining economic stability and alleviating poverty through the extension of employment opportunities.
predepends on.
several years ago he gave up trying to persuade miami to improve its city-owned orange bowl and instead built his own $ 100 million coliseum with private funds.
similarly, a policy was introduced to gradually phase out the quantitative restrictions on imports and adjust them through customs tariff.
her immediate predecessor suffered a nervous breakdown.
the main cause for this intense increase if current account deficit amount was the considerable increase in trade deficit.
therefore, the national planning commission has accorded priority to the collection of additional data and the extension of planning methodology.
warning node below not understood.
your account has expired please contact your system administrator.
however, i see so many people busy complaining about kathmandu.
openoffice.org spreadsheet.
u.s. auto analysts also noted that ford is in the best position to benefit from the large number of jaguar shares that have moved over the past month into the hands of arbitragers waiting for the highest takeover bid.
industry, tourism and electricity: 2.
whether undo operation is possible.
polar coordinates.
output levels.
align right sides.
produce a lense flare effect using gradients.
right or bottom color when drawing gradients, not used for solid color.
priority.
whether the toolbar item is visible when the toolbar is in a horizontal orientation.
whether this tag affects strikethrough.
module handler.
abbreviation.
recurrence date is invalid.
compression level.
if you enable this option higher color values will be swapped with lower ones and vice versa.
pattern.
minimum child width.
mönchengladbach.
radioactive would have an adverse effect on the living being and plants.
america/rainyriver.
dark green 2.
leftover unconverted data in read buffer.
the court hearing began in early october at the request of anthony hazell district auditor for hammersmith who argued that local councils are n't vested with constitutional authority to engage in such capital-markets activities.
use saved size and position of the tile.
that ought to make sure we 're all thinking for the long term.
last year the average broker earned $ 71,309 24  lower than in 1987.
if the aforementioned unrealistic growth were excluded, the growth rate in per-capita income during the seventh plant would be considerably lower.
all these considerations clearly indicate that energy development should be accorded high priority in nepalâ€™s development planning.
convert flowed text to regular text object preserves appearance.
block ?
granbury.
for people who insist on jumping in now to buy the funds newgate 's mr. foot says :  the only advice i have for these folks is that those who come to the party late had better be ready to leave quickly.
phone ethernet.
actions if none is specified, aptitude will enter interactive mode.
goal.
gold.
unlimit display.
font weight set.
file name.
select address book for automatic contacts.
spouse's name.
mexico 's president salinas said the country 's recession had ended and the economy was growing again.
you are modifying a recurring event. what would you like to modify?
buddy comment for.
for fiscal 1989 's fourth quarter rockwell 's net income totaled $ 126.1 million or 50 cents a share.
switch to tab 10.
position of the scrollbar.
specifies the aspect ratio of the brush.
failed to open file.
set image canvas size.
thus, the share of the private sector investment is estimated to reach 64.1 of gross fixed investment during the eighth plan period.
on weekends she came to work to prepare study plans or sometimes even to polish the furniture in her classroom.
firstly, the fact that the availability of resources is determined by the implementation of the plan and the economic achievement to be made during the plan period was neglected.
punctuation, connector.
mp3 audio.
make transparency allornothing.
arrangements will be made to keep the records of expenditure in clear and transparent manner at all levels.
only 19  of the purchasing managers reported better export orders in october down from 27  in september.
the motive is not to discard cinema or tv telecast so easily.
two antitrust agencies may face further cutbacks because of a complicated new funding device some democrats in congress are warning.
using current old file as you requested.
intensity.
could not load image.
effect to add to the border shadow, border or none.
huesaturation tool adjust hue, saturation, and lightness.
file under.
minimum time the pointer must stay over a menu item before the submenu appear.
crime was awful test scores were low and there was no enrollment in honors programs.
the url for the link to the website of the program.
show test options.
getting routing table.
vehicle owners can choose to pay using fuel cards or credit/debit cards.
cannot access archive.
david dinkins  says the kicker  why does he always wait until he 's caught ?
cannot add cms recipient information.
minimize window.
in other stock-market news the tokyo stock exchange said that for the week ended friday the balance of margin buying rose 189.8 billion yen -lrb- $ 1.34 billion -rrb- to 7.160 trillion yen -lrb- $ 50.46 billion -rrb-.
received request to sync synchronously.
america/thunderbay.
unable to add to permit list.
6.2 balance of payments situation although the balance of payments situation appeared favourable during f.y. 1990/91, the current account deficit was noticed to have increased considerably.
north america.
volume control.
preferred visual assistive technology application.
it is human nature that everyone likes to win and do things better than others.
the visible impediments to economic growth such as natural constraints, preliminary stage of development efforts, low productivity, subsistence agricultural system and slackness in the expansion of non-agricultural sector are the major factors for a weak economic base.
schools play an important role in imparting knowledge and producing individuals with high moral and ethical values.
substeps.
mr. robinson of delta & pine the seed producer in scott miss. said plant genetic's success in creating genetically engineered male steriles doesn't automatically mean it would be simple to create hybrids in all crops.
no misspelled words.
authentication failed.
noise is directly related to man both in creation and experience.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 6.
paste into folder.
close window.
black  white.
certificate name.
disk view columns order.
print preview.
chinese simplified.
toggles snaptogrid.
remove transformations.
they said universally without a single exception : do n't even compromise.
visalia.
i mumbled apologies whenever that happened.
moosonee.
get an archive of the list this message belongs to.
egegik.
key data.
program class as used by the window manager.
unable to send message.
with the objective of providing direct benefits to the low income people, a policy was adopted granting one third interest subside on the current interest rates in a lloan of upto rs. 10,000 under the small farmers development project, intensive banking programme, and rural women development programme.
show “”.
sent to calendar as tentative.
display the cell sensitive.
nonlinear swiss army knife filter.
according to the world health organization, only one in ten people exercise regularly and a majority do not follow a healthy diet.
add border.
header 5.
check whether evolution is the default mailer.
cairo portable document format.
diverted by to.
please insert a disc in the drive and press enter.
manual package selection.
document.
the total sectoral demands for labour are primarily determined by the growth rates of production in various sectors.
america/paramaribo.
caption.
transparent background.
open files.
transparency.
classify as public.
redo the undone move.
such a proposal values jaguar at more than # 1.6 billion -lrb- $ 2.53 -rrb-.
mrs. ward for one was relieved.
adopting a training-wage policy means  getting beyond the nickel and diming of the minimum wage  mrs. roukema said.
ellipse preferences.
alberta.
no gradients.
the growth rate in the past years in internal resources as a financing source for development expenditure stood at 16.4 percent at current prices and 6.1 percent at constant prices.
the latter actually enhances the bond between the workers and eventually long lasting friendships are formed.
view is reorderable.
it is the very building of it that is important not how much of it is used or its economics.
start date.
polar grid radius interval.
user installation failed!
expected schema, got.
browser selection.
lights.
changelog.
required participant.
an evolution calendar reminder is about to trigger. this reminder is configured to run the following program are you sure you want to run this program?
packets transmitted.
similarly, there took place only a slow growth in products directly associated with the needs of the society such as cement, sugar, cotton merchandise, matches, there occurred a considerable growth in consumable products like liquor, beer, synthetic cloth, soap, shoe and biscuit.
temporary file creation failed.
a user on the computer is remotely viewing your desktop.
bank of new england has been hit hard by the region 's real-estate slump with its net income declining 42  to $ 121.6 million or 61 cents a share in the first nine months of 1989 from the year-earlier period.
state.
issued by subject.
indian/chagos.
3.2 communication : a.
show page border.
function name.
a detailed sectoral breakdown of the total development outlay is presented in table 5.
but it is n't clear yet whether the central bank will make such a move.
jacareacanga.
additional information.
not found.
macmillan/mcgraw says  well over 10 million  of its scoring high test-preparation books have been sold since their introduction 10 years ago with most sales in the last five years.
apply a filter to the package list.
didn't understand ' list must start with a.
nick completed character.
pneumatic/hydraulic.
for instance at the first meeting the two sides could n't even agree on basic data used in price discussions.
read messages.
sort ascending.
vertically aligned valve.
joint management system will be applied for involving the users in the management of multipurpose, large an medium projects with special emphasis given on irrigation management training institutional development at the farmers' level and access to technical services.
run evince in presentation mode.
pointer mode.
it would ease jail overcrowding while preserving historic structures the company says.
for the year ended sept. 30 ralston earned $ 422.5 million or $ 6.44 a share up 8.9  from $ 387.8 million or $ 5.63 a share.
couldn't create temporary file for saving.
input methods.
smooth palette.
reflectivity.
unknown option.
the ft 30-share index settled 16.7 points higher at 1738.1.
/conversation/add.
delete selected snippet.
stacked.
bottom attach.
'reset' output variable.
participation in this sense is an essential element of human development.
here you should enter the name of the directory where icon images are located.
atlantic/southgeorgia.
bonds : shearson lehman hutton treasury index 3436.58 up commodities : dow jones futures index 129.91 up 0.28 ; spot index 131.01 up 1.17.
casually.
tasks with attachments.
the queen of hearts.
untitled window.
sir tommy.
align left.
waves.
make sure that totem is properly installed.
duplicate conf file /.
however, while the immigration problem remained unchanged due to the inability to restore cordial relations with the neighbouring country with an open border and the failure to recognize the problem in an international perspective, the other aspects of population control ended in failure for the lack of complementary programmes.
activity/data identifier.
downloading unknown amount of image data.
server information.
must specify one or more directories to recursively list.
the closure to be monitored for accelerator changes.
cannot find certificate for.
sets the size of the checkerboard used to display transparency.
harry millis an analyst at mcdonald & co. in cleveland said gencorp 's unanticipated losses come largely from an accident at a government-owned assembly plant in kansas run by a private subcontractor that makes cluster bombs for gencorp 's aerojet ordnance business.
thus, the average annual growth in loans and investment during this period was 23.0 percent.
writing and printing paper :  the consumption of writing and printing paper during the eighth plan is estimated to be 121,000 metric tons.
allow all users to contact me.
autocad image.
while researchers believe such transplants could help treat diseases like alzheimer 's anti-abortionists oppose the research.
maybe he just wants to make something happen  said one takeover expert.
an official of the palestinian olympic committee said the committee first applied for membership in 1979 and renewed its application in august of this year.
you must name this search folder.
the 7 5/8  bonds due 2009 are priced to yield 7.65  and 7 5/8  bonds due 2029 are priced at 98 1/2 to yield 7.74.
pause.
save comment to file.
failed to get object reference for configserver.
torrent file.
add in event port.
deal new cards from the deck.
copyright information for the program.
join.
force process to finish normally.
revert.
price records are being set at auctions this week.
centrifugal pump or fan.
grand junction.
volume muted.
previous tab.
foreground as registration color.
single line mode.
other sheets.
open a terminal in the document location.
could not connect to.
if true, metacity will give the user less feedback by using wireframes, avoiding animations, or other means. this is a significant reduction in usability for many users, but may allow legacy applications to continue working, and may also be a useful tradeoff for terminal servers. however, the wireframe feature is disabled when accessibility is on.
the total and sectoral value added has been determined within the framework of the model and the fact that the total and sectoral investment has a decisive impact on the overall economic growth rate has been taken into consideration.
centering.
yahoo! work screen name 3.
it will be mandatory to get the decision of the user's committee if any part of the project needs to be awarded to a contractor.
the house passed legislation designed to make it easier for the transportation department to block airline leveraged buy-outs.
edge behavior.
couldn't open.
/tools/preferences.
marble.
key agreement was aborted.
channel.
all this has cast a pall over columbia savings & loan association and its high-rolling 43-year-old chairman thomas spiegel who built the $ 12.7 billion beverly hills calif. thrift with high-yield junk bonds.
south point.
em square.
photo.
the japanese companies bankroll many small u.s. companies with promising products or ideas frequently putting their money behind projects that commercial banks wo n't touch.
exact.
maceió.
during the eighth plan period, the rate of inflation will be maintained below 9 percent in average by reducing the increasing liquidity of the economy and by adopting other appropriate monetary and fiscal policy measures.
make horizontal gaps between objects equal.
contours.
milledgeville.
what are the advantages and disadvantages of having a pet ?
aspect ratio.
while formulating and executing the economic and social infrastructure for rural development through these organizations, particular attention will be paid to the interest of the entire village rather then to that of an individual.
percent white.
your oct. 6 article  japan 's financial firms lure science graduates  states  industrial companies are accusing financial institutions of jeopardizing japan 's economy by raising the salary stakes for new employees.
this meeting has been delegated.
spool mail file.
american express has more than 24 million card holders in the u.s. and over half have the green card.
hootphone.
magnify.
collapsed subprocess.
month view.
colorcube analysis.
printers.
print all key/value pairs in a directory.
all information on these tasks will be deleted and can not be restored.
length of scale's slider.
shadows.
ubuntu 4.10 security updates.
this understanding with india had a positive impact the year on the countryâ€™s economic activities.
blowing sand.
split segment uniformly.
foreground stipple mask.
while the foreign currency earning in 1990/91 was equivalent to us dollar 56.9 millions, it reached us dollar 62.1 million, going up by 9 percent in 1991/92.
multiplier scoring.
show the logout button.
further the herald seemed torn editorially between keeping its old-time hearst readership blue-collar and sports-oriented and trying to provide a sprightly upscale alternative to the sometimes staid times.
we 've tried to train the youngsters but they have their discos and their dances and they just drift away.
server response does not match.
superscript 3.
electronic messaging.
current color.
create a new layer.
show week numbers.
nevsehir.
this message is signed with a signature, but there is no corresponding public key.
default list of columns visible in the list view.
green frequency.
is empty.
searching by name.
username.
multiple gradients.
select a file.
is not a regular file.
goody products inc. cut its quarterly dividend to five cents a share from 11.5 cents a share.
private sector will be encouraged to actively involve in the development and expansion of irrigation facility.
the company attributed lower sales and earnings for the steel segment to the loss of results from the lorain ohio plant which now is a 50-50 joint venture with japan 's kobe steel ltd.
there was an error parsing the default action command associated with this location.
northolt.
unknown volume control.
while jute and jute goods, rice, pulse and timber were main exportable in the initial years, the industrial finished products such as the woolen carpets and readymade garments became main exportable in the later years.
not on the same file system.
undo the last package operation or group of operations.
new version available.
triangles.
mount the selected volume.
wainwright.
error reading from server. remote end closed connection.
home phone.
transform image with the mandelbrot fractal.
unable to kick user.
encouragement has been provided to the establishment of new financial institutions and the development of capital markets.
stls not supported by server.
select an object with pattern fill to extract objects from.
couldn't read flipped bit.
add connection point.
he said chrysler fully expects to have them installed across its light-truck line by the sept. 1 1991 deadline.
indeed for many japanese trading companies the favorite u.s. small business is one whose research and development can be milked for future japanese use.
email headers.
vertically.
configure grid.
make destination image transparent where bump height is zero.
little wonder that buyers for junk have been found wanting  he said.
the british paper packaging and publishing concern said profit from continuing lines fell 10  to # 118 million from # 130.6 million.
backflow preventer.
drifting sand.
a new education plan was introduced in the form of a national education system, which in reality created a havoc in the education sector.
authenticate proxy server connections.
we created our own storm and now we are upset after it rained.
millisecond.
chemical fertilizers the requirement of chemical fertilizers for the eighth plan is estimated to be 916,000 metric tons the total requirement of chemical fertilizers in the country is being met through import.
svg art.
use a transparent background only the strokes painted will be visible.
eindhoven.
state.
converting to indexed colors stage 2.
ics calendar.
click to edit the text, drag to select part of the text.
â challenges as a result of the controlled and protectionoriented policies of the past, the economy could not achieve desired level of development and economic distortions emerged.
select items in this window matching a given pattern.
welcome to the gnome desktop.
invalid property type for property.
the stock icon displayed in widgets representing this action.
africa/cairo.
germany.
we must be very cautious about labeling investors as  long-term  or  short-term.
delete line ?
folder already exists.
set channel modes to.
whether the completions should be shown in a popup window.
reassign shortcut.
a medium-sized one in brooklyn it says could be altered to house up to 1,000 inmates at a lower cost than building a new prison in upstate new york.
eaton is an automotive parts controls and aerospace electronics concern.
connection established, cookie sent.
terminal.
entire image.
the depth and extent of poverty, unemployment, the growing disparity between rural and urban sectors and unequitable distribution if development efforts on the days to come.
editorials in the greenville newspaper allowed that mrs. yeargin was wrong but also said the case showed how testing was being overused.
as a result of the low growth rate in per capita income, nepal happened to stand low even among the poorest nations of the world.
recurring.
failed to open for writing.
per-share net rose to 7.84 yen from 6.53 yen.
select a person from your address book below, or add a new person.
objective: irigation projects in the eighth plan will be implemented to achieve the following objectives: 1.
william c. walbrecher jr. an executive at san francisco-based 1st nationwide bank was named president and chief executive officer of citadel holding corp. and its principal operating unit fidelity federal bank.
in addition to volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, other natural phenomena also brings destruction.
table cell.
and because of the time difference the japanese and the u.s. markets ' trading hours do n't overlap.
whether erroneous values are automatically changed to a spin button's nearest step increment.
ery often children may be the cause for strained feelings.
find next occurrence of the search string.
print size.
no objects selected to take the style from.
the mime type of the file.
nissan cited strong domestic sales against the backdrop of continuous economic expansion.
distort colors by random amounts.
vertically aligned resistor european.
use font in label.
russell.
the text of the label.
display file selection dialog.
for instance, it will be possible to transfer the traditional agricultural pattern to modern agricultural system through the use of electricity in lift irrigation, making use of technology and fertilizers.
my processes.
action not allowed.
the license of the program.
adjust the offset distance.
new view preview.
the irony is that the attack commercial after getting a boost in last year 's presidential campaign has come of age in an off-off election year with only a few contests scattered across the country.
select playlist format.
if the toggle button should be pressed in or not.
lighting effects.
goes down one cell.
speak row.
set character encoding.
list display a list of chat rooms on the network. warning, some servers may disconnect you upon doing this.
view the main toolbar.
verbatim.
permissions.
export selection to a bitmap and insert it into document.
reconfiguring.
add a new snippet.
background color.
removal of unnecessary delays to accelerate the government of government policies c.
â following the formation of the nepali congress government with a clean mandate in the general elections held in may 1991, the national planning commission in the course of formulation the eighth plan brought out for circulation and approach paper of the plan.
millimeters.
when true, empty menu proxies for this action are hidden.
ciudad victoria.
enters and exits flat review mode.
photo viewer.
america/iqaluit.
only a marginal increase in per capita income in 1991/92 can be mainly attributed to the decline in agriculture production.
miscellaneous symbols.
c source code header.
search folders.
heavy duststorm.
the collapse of junk bond prices and the cancellation of many junk bond financings apparently have taken their toll on closely held drexel the leading underwriter in that market.
eight point star.
missouri.
default zoom level used by the list view.
original message.
man, of course, has abused almost all the sources of nature.
but many banks are turning away from strict price competition.
recompute preview image.
evolution icalendar importer.
tabarka.
saturation.
lighthouse ii  was painted in oils by the playwright in 1901  after years of decline weddings in france showed a 2.2  upturn last year with 6,000 more couples exchanging rings in 1988 than in the previous year the national statistics office said.
rotate image?
foreign exchange situation: the foreign exchange reserves situation was favorable on the whole during the period of july 1961 to  july 1990.
message type.
tabora.
software installation instructions.
sunos news font.
four of the five surviving workers have asbestos-related diseases including three with recently diagnosed cancer.
distribute vertical centers of targets.
profile description.
corumbá.
vertically aligned capacitor.
edit mode.
it 's just sort of a one-upsmanship thing with some people  added larry shapiro.
you have not filled in all of the required information.
videos.
toggles whether to show time as busy.
this does nothing it is only a demonstration.
mail disposition report.
several moves were taken following the october 1987 crash to coordinate and sometimes deliberately disconnect the stock and futures markets in times of heightened volatility.
money managers ranked ibm 's offering as the most significant investment-grade sale of the year because large issues of long-term debt by companies with triple-a credit are infrequent.
voc audio.
foreground to peaks.
lines per major line.
start index.
text file.
he even sold one unit that made vinyl checkbook covers.
degree of slope of each piece's edge.
hydraulic pressure source.
neighbor.
horizontal.
la crosse.
always use the location entry, instead of the pathbar.
sans 12.
coordinate expression has operator following operator with no operand in between.
cannot save. nothing is selected.
'  uncertainty about the prospects for further action to curtail stock-index arbitrage a form of program trading blamed for recent volatility in the market also contributed to its lack of direction mr. puccio said.
it 's hardly a question of quality the 1982 salon is a beautiful wine but as mr. pratt noted people have their own ideas about value.
in fact, schools should implement physical education on a daily basis rather than twice weekly.
character map.
couldn't load one brush in the pipe, giving up.
failed to register with the message bus.
but mr. ackerman said the buy-back and the above-market price paid prove that mr. edelman is running scared.
compress weekends in month view.
brooksville.
natchitoches.
line wrapping mode.
help contents.
the lower figures the spokesman said would stem from preferred shares being converted to common stock and the possibility that sea containers ' subsidiaries might be required to place their shares in the open market.
simple output variable.
in this era of frantic competition for ad dollars a lot of revenue-desperate magazines are getting pretty cozy with advertisers fawning over them in articles and offering pages of advertorial space.
but he blames program trading for only some of the market 's volatility.
the framers hardly discussed the appropriations clause at the constitutional convention of 1787 according to madison 's notes.
airconditioner.
make keyboard selection commands work on objects in current layer and all its sublayers.
the following error occurred while exporting.
specify prefix of saved configuration.
cobourg.
at constant prices, the total development expenditure in fiscal years 1990/91 and 1991/92 is es timated to be rs. 2997.5 and rs. 2320.8 million respectively.
movement detector.
america/regina.
the economy is clearly slowing  says robert black president of the richmond federal reserve bank.
saguache.
several traders maintained that the merc 's 12-point circuit-breaker aggravated the market slide oct. 13 by directing additional selling pressure to the floor of the new york stock exchange.
enables the proxy settings when accessing http over the internet.
reciprocating compressor or pump.
name of the window  used for configuration serialization.
fill right to left.
brightnesscontrast.
indent width.
the oklahoma city energy and defense concern said it will record a $ 7.5 million reserve for its defense group including a $ 4.7 million charge related to problems under a fixed-price development contract and $ 2.8 million in overhead costs that wo n't be reimbursed.
drexel remains confident of its future creditworthiness.
error reading units.
window manager.
london late eurodollars : 8 3/4  to 8 5/8  one month ; 8 3/4  to 8 5/8  two months ; 8 11/16  to 8 9/16  three months ; 8 9/16  to 8 7/16  four months ; 8 1/2  to 8 3/8  five months ; 8 7/16  to 8 5/16  six months.
you can not use "refresh scripts" while a scriptfu dialog box is open. please close all scriptfu windows and try again.
infant mortality rate stands 102, child death rate at 165, the crude birth rate at 39.60 and crude death rate at 14 per thousand respectively.
use default font.
auto requires exactly one part file argument.
this location is not a valid one.
select brush folders.
show cards as vcard or csv file.
remove the jacks.
hide the entry text.
the dalles.
sioux city.
invert.
you cannot move a folder into itself.
custom command to use instead of the shell.
error syncing.
/sort objects/all by name.
dot dot dot.
by addressing those problems mr. maxwell said the new funds have become  extremely attractive to japanese and other investors outside the u.s.
single click.
jump to previous song.
letter, modifier.
under such circumstances, while genuine entrepreneurs become discouraged, industrialists and traders, adept at exploiting non-transparent policies to their benefits, will have the upper hand.
goes to next list item.
chinese traditional.
in respect of several development activities, the private sector and nongovernmental organizations can evidently be more effective in terms of cost, flexibility, motivation and initiative.
syntax error within moniker.
spread out horizontally.
use masksize map.
human motion.
save device status.
in this perspective, emphasis is given on formulating integrated and inter -regional programmes that primarily focus on the creation of productive, emphasis is given on formulating integrated and inter-regional programmes that primarily focus on the creation of productive assets base and additional employment opportunities to alleviate poverty, extension of social services like health education, vocational training and drinking water, and effective management and protection of natural resources.
couldn't generate secure shell key.
application unique name.
of the approximately 200 sponsors of the recent march in washington for the homeless you chose to cite such groups as the national association of home builders and the international union of bricklayers and allied craftsmen insinuating that the march got its major support from self-serving groups that  know a good thing when they see it  and that the crusade was based on greed or the profit motive.
coordinate expression has an operator where an operand was expected.
sleepy.
indian/comoro.
the gtkadjustment that contains the current value of this range object.
mr. mcgovern was widely seen as sales and not profit oriented.
video files.
there are no sidewalls to shield vehicles in cases of accidents or slips.
the economy will not be able to fulfill the developmental aspirations of the common people without a sustainable and high economic growth rate.
mailing list actions.
program version.
possible values are "merged", "separate" and "disabled".
attribute.
consequently, this led to an increased and heavy dependence of the economy on foreign aid.
the increase in government expenditure and the lack of sufficient development in laternative inves tment sectors capable of attracting private savings have led to increase in consumption and the fall in gross domestic product.
updating package lists.
alpena.
in the past five years japanese companies have tripled their commitments in asia to $ 5.57 billion.
usage.
select a time to compare against.
next, encourage school-going children to bring home-cooked food to school.
select date.
this generation is politically and economically active, hard working and mobile.
the stocks of banking concerns based in massachusetts were n't helped much by the announcement traders said because many of those concerns have financial problems tied to their real-estate loan portfolios making them unattractive takeover targets.
istanbul.
fixed.
wine auctions have almost exhausted the limited supply of those wines mr. shapiro continued :  we 've seen a dramatic decrease in demand for wines from the '40s and '50s which go for $ 300 to $ 400 a bottle.
show a blinking cursor in the body of displayed messages.
display dialog boxes from shell scripts.
ms. waleson is a free-lance writer based in new york.
question.
both moody 's and s&p cited first boston 's reliance in recent years on merchant banking which *t*-1 has been responsible for a significant portion of the closely held firm 's profit.
frequency converter.
infrared interface.
the device to read directinput events from.
gillam.
contact list.
remove controller?
printing problem.
properties.
marginal.
amelia.
the share of export in gdp stood at 7 percent in 1964/65, which declined to 5.7 percent only on 1989/990.
profile name.
couldn't add photo.
transaction.
perhaps you can even grow your own fruit trees, like guava, papaya. and mango.
scriptfu folder selection.
but he adds  i feel pressured disappointed uncomfortable and frankly quite angry with viacom.
â the estimated growth rate of the eighth plan con not be considered unduly high in comparison with the high growth rates achieved by developing nations through economic liberalization.
now he plans to sell all his stocks by the first quarter of 1990.
on a commercial scale the sterilization of the pollen-producing male part has only been achieved in corn and sorghum feed grains.
but it is not installable.
reboot.
but now there seems to be a fairly systematic effort to address the problem  said chuck hurley vice president of communications for the insurance institute for highway safety.
unable to connect.
a boolean that indicates whether the menu is tornoff.
some dealers said the dollar was pressured slightly because a number of market participants had boosted their expectations in the past day and were looking for an index above 50 which indicates an expanding manufacturing economy.
opens up the orientation map editor.
the radio show  enraged us  says mrs. ward.
you must wait longer to change your password.
publishing location.
text to be displayed in the progress bar.
fill.
clear.
in hartford conn. the charter oak bridge will soon be replaced the cast-iron medallions from its railings relegated to a park.
export preview.
this plan will in the course of resource allocation, accord priority to such programmes whose completion provides necessary support to another or those which have a high economic benefit.
color of the selection box.
the prospective buyers included investor marvin davis and the toronto sun.
the national association of diaper services philadelphia says that since january it has gotten more than 672 inquiries from people interested in starting diaper services.
considering the fact that the non governmental organizational and community organizations have been effectively engaged in rural development over the past several years, such organizations will be involved to the maximum possible extent in development activities during the eighth plan.
frame style already has a piece at position.
the queen of diamonds.
certificate is the only message, certificates imported and verified.
sets automatic aspect ratio.
nekoosa would n't be a diversification.
alias.
in consequence, there arose impediments to urban development, the social service infrastructures became insufficient, unemployment increased, the environment deteriorated, pollution prevailed and in the long run, the adverse impact in the economy as a whole was evidently perceptible to all.
center of nova.
sheet name.
mr. rosenblum who apparently has an unpublished phone number also could n't be reached.
x resolution.
it is n't clear how much a restructuring would help columbia stockholders.
there was a great increase in the foreign debt in the years past.
document ended unexpectedly just after an open angle bracket.
the provision called the  two-time-losers  amendment by its supporters apparently was aimed at preventing texas air corp. chairman frank lorenzo from attempting to take over another airline.
all workspaces.
he said mexico could be one of the next countries to be removed from the priority list because of its efforts to craft a new patent law.
expand.
fifteen of the 26 subcommittee members attended the hearing most notably rep. john dingell d. mich. the full house energy and commerce committee chairman who has been willing to let mr. markey carry the legislation in recent months.
sort by name.
state.
save window positions on exit.
during this plan period, an atmosphere favourable to the open and competitive growth of industries will be created and expanded.
he will keep the ball down move it around.
never expires.
removing contact from ldap server.
evolution quit unexpectedly while you were composing a new message. recovering the message will allow you to continue where you left off.
switch to the layer below the current.
montes claros.
maze size.
workspace layout rows, columns, orientation ,.
couldn't communicate with server.
job role.
despite the enormous sums of money they 're paid to stand up at a japanese plate a good number decide it 's not worth it and run for home.
repeat.
africa/saotome.
requested operation requires superuser privilege.
the 1988 trade act requires mrs. hills to issue another review of the performance of these countries by april 30.
europe/zurich.
configure plugins.
no email action.
title.
when offered a free trip from the bronx wedtech 's home to washington d.c. by one of wedtech 's principals he tells the reader  mindful of accepting anything of value from those i was writing about i declined.
europe/simferopol.
removing.
you send.
the magazine combines how-to pieces on topics like backyard composting explanatory essays on such things as what happens after you flush your toilet and hard-hitting pieces on alleged environmental offenders.
novell groupwise messenger protocol plugin.
ms. ensrud is a free-lance wine writer in new york.
an error occurred while testing archive.
criticism in the u.s. over recent japanese acquisitions is looming ever larger in the two countries ' relations.
schema options.
you really need the campbell soups of the world to be interested in your magazine if you 're going to make a run of it  says mike white senior vice president and media director at ddb needham chicago.
cotonou.
mr. thomas currently chairman of the equal employment opportunity commission would add another conservative voice to the closely divided court.
displacement map.
separator.
wadena.
similarly other eight sites are important either historically or culturally and religiously.
open a file.
the mother and child fell on the road, landing right in the path of a van.
should not have "resize" attribute on element for maximized/shaded states.
character device.
list of clues for the attachment reminder plugin to look for in a message body.
cursor blink.
color exchange.
overseas import increased considerably due to the country -wise and product-wise diversification of import during this review period.
the managers ' index which measures the health of the manufacturing sector stood at 47.6  in october above september 's 46  and also above average forecasts for the index of 45.3.
the new file is currently filtered out. you need to adjust your filter settings to make the file visible.
pen drive.
magic missile.
add new vector.
number of layers.
ask before emptying the trash or deleting files.
18th.
cairo postscript.
the two of diamonds.
every year,there is a need to make huge investment on the repair, maintenance and operation of large projects.
goes to previous visited link.
error getting new value for.
keywords.
your password will be transmitted encrypted.
under terms of the agreement shareholders other than the underwoods will receive $ 3,500 a share at closing which is expected in december.
slower.
asia/singapore.
first, i would build my dream house.
copy gradient flare.
no value to set for key '.
search for the contact or doubleclick here to create a new contact.
another big source of energy, specially in metropolitan cities is the garbage and the refuse.
point lay.
ï»¿past development efforts, achievements and constraints.
open file.
george christopher the former san francisco mayor who built candlestick park for the giants in the 1960s wo n't endorse the new ballpark.
test.
investors who want to change the required timing should write their representatives in congress he added.
move card from waste.
align right edge of target.
i can revoke this signature at a later date.
brushes.
shapes.
transition.
small package.
rivers are important also for scenic beauty.
message.
grid offset.
show side bar.
watermark image for the top.
presque isle.
text direction.
latest news.
work online.
get public key.
if this is set to true, an icon linking to the trash will be put on the desktop.
paulo afonso.
lamp.
menu bar.
save flame.
the dax index closed at 1472.76 up from 1466.29.
form entrance.
double filled triangle.
never expires.
for its employees to sign up for the options a college also must approve the plan.
error during writing indexed/gray image.
show the column header buttons.
glowing.
freeport-mcmoran a new orleans-based diversified energy conglomerate said the partnership will exchange its assets for common shares of a yet-to-be-formed entity.
exist.
but it resists yielding political ground.
new folder.
action group.
house blue.
whether bold attribute is set.
a sample plugin in python with no features.
internal error couldn't generate list of packages to download.
geraldton.
make the window not appear in pagers.
orientation.
11th.
finding similar colors.
failed to shut down backend.
previous chapter or movie.
kspread spreadsheet.
radius.
sizing.
the disk where you are trying to save the file has a limitation on length of the file names. please use a shorter name.
stop it!
color space.
remember pinocchio ?  says a female voice.
the government reported that orders for manufactured goods were essentially unchanged in september while construction spending was slightly lower.
edit.
show guides.
successfully wrote configuration file.
very few employers hire disabled people as the latter is considered more a liability than an asset in the organization.
preferences.
the development of the cottage industry could not be oriented towards a correct direction in the past while rs. 9.6 million was invested in 1974/75 following the registration of 70 cottage and small industries, a sum of rs. 828.6 million was invested in 1989/90 with the registration of 932 cottage and small industries.
the brain initiates the whole system of the body.
sussex.
in the soil conservation and watershed management sector, 29 gulley control, 24 landslide control, terracerehabilitation work in 92 hectares and protection of 43 water sources were accomplished and 283 tons pf medicinal herbs were processed.
not on server list.
pixelize.
fax.
while it called for liberal economic policies and the creation of an atmosphere conducive to industrialists with some reassurances in certain spheres for achieving industrial expansion, the industries could not prosper in the absence of transparency in industrial policy which remained under strict government control.
will o the wisp.
do not tell me again.
glassbreak sensor.
create an array of copies of the image.
no more blockquotes.
vacaville.
manufacturing processes, technical demonstrations and even lectures with experiments are being shown on the t v. screen.
interlace.
it was believed that the system would be instrumental to fulfil the national objective of education towards preparation of neces sary manpower for economic development with the dissemination of requisite knowledge, science, development, conservation and promotion of technical expertise and skill.
window.
okayama.
alert.
merchant banking where firms commit their own money  is getting riskier and there 's less of it to go around.
uptick an expression signifying that a transaction in a listed security occurred at a higher price than the previous transaction in that security.
namsos.
python source code.
line selected down from cursor position.
if you quit gimp now, these changes will be lost.
rantoul.
congress learned during the reagan administration that it could intimidate the executive branch by uttering again and again the same seven words :  provided that no funds shall be spent.
channel.
whether this tag affects the rise.
in arizona california florida louisiana maryland new jersey south carolina and texas educators say they are common classroom tools.
dealers said that interpretation sparked expectations of an imminent bid by ford.
where there are zebra crossings on the road for the pedestrians to cross, one should cross along them.
among them two of the heritage sites are important naturally.
there is no business reason for my departure  nor any disagreement over policy he added.
to make life tolerable and bearable one must cooperate with one's neighbor.
seahaven.
add sample point.
the following packages are in a mess due to serious problems during installation. they must be reinstalled for them and any packages that depend on them to function properly.
new tab.
roanoke rapids.
alamosa.
some 3.8 million of the five million who will get letters were preapproved for credit with gmac.
delete the current layer.
can operate on layers only but was called on channel or mask.
enlightenment theme.
tofino.
free for chat.
make all warnings fatal.
problem in.
as shown in table6, the negative savings during the eighth plan will be, more or less, equivalent to 34.5 percent of the gross fixed capital investment of the public sector.
move window one workspace to the left.
alternate the sign of color changes for each column.
beleaguered castle.
current view.
filesystem.
bay city.
floppy drive.
log all chats.
partial convertibility in foreign exchange was introducted in february 1992.
dd acquisition has launched a suit in a delaware court seeking the withdrawal of dunkin 's poison pill rights and employee stock ownership plans which it claims were put in place to deter bidders.
could not load  module loading not supported on this system.
goes to next table.
show error options.
standard & poor 's 500-stock index added 0.84 to 341.20 ; the rise was equivalent to a gain of about six points in the industrial average.
rows of.
for the aforementioned purpose, plans are underway to review the license system and all other existing policies and regulations with a view to increasing the involvement of private sector and nongovernmental organizations in the economic development of the country.
fatal parse error in brush file  wide brushes are not supported.
america/scoresbysund.
insert anchor.
needs at least one package name argument.
no packages found.
whether to blink the cursor.
workgroup switch subdued.
pacific first financial corp. said shareholders approved its acquisition by royal trustco ltd. of toronto for $ 27 a share or $ 212 million.
scale set.
user is not logged in.
mullan.
it recently signed a preliminary agreement to negotiate exclusively with the bank of tokyo ltd. for the sale of part of its leasing business to the japanese bank.
the government also raised the salary in accordance with the recommendations of the commission.
by 1961 1,452,000 gallons of water per day was available to 6 percent of the population.
replace all.
space between value text and the slider/trough area.
a plan must, moreover, take full account of administrative relationships and the limited financial and other resources available.
choose palette color.
a jackson machine domain.
the company said holders of stock of record nov. 10 will receive 1/10th of one cent a share as the redemption payment.
thus war is the mother of many evils.
fields shown.
suggests.
subject public key info.
voronoi.
rotation angle positive  counterclockwise.
could not open.
switch to the previous document window.
boothville.
pacific/norfolk.
multilayer remote switch.
restart evolution after backup.
mechanical command by tappet.
didn't understand ' wrong number of elements.
release notification.
rectify.
failed to satisfy dependency for.
configuring secure shell keys.
the stock icon displayed on the item.
last year government payments to farmers slipped to less than $ 14.5 billion from a record $ 16.7 billion in 1987.
path for playlists file to use.
the united kingdom high court declared illegal a variety of interest-rate swap transactions and options deals between a london borough council and commercial banks.
failed to create directory.
i could not initialize bonobo.
text y alignment.
limbu.
right meta.
whether gtkwidgetshowall should not affect this widget.
medium building subdued.
not installed.
in this context, maintenance of regional balance forms another objective of he eighth plan.
randomize angle.
start at column.
mehamn.
type any character to close this window.
but in 1988 mcgraw-hill purchased the random house unit that publishes scoring high which later became part of macmillan/mcgraw.
volume control preferences.
import snippets.
aware of the failure of the government sector all over the world in the production and delivery of goods through resource allocation, the government will assume the role of a catalyst and promote of private sector rather than controlling or interfering with their economic activities.
apply canvas.
scroll pane.
africa/elaaiun.
store transformation.
include window decoration.
source code.
sets the monitor's vertical resolution, in dots per inch. if set to 0, forces the x server to be queried for both horizontal and vertical resolution information.
copyright.
as usually practiced it takes advantage of a rather basic concept : two separate markets in different locations trading basically the same widgets ca n't trade them for long at prices that are widely different.
dvd.
grid lines.
necessary arrangements will be made to avail electricity and drinking water from the small irrigation systems, if found feasible to do so.
note selecting instead of the virtual package.
number of pixels in the left margin.
accept file transfer request from ?
marcus bains line color  day view.
ireland.
evanston.
this has led to as increase in the current account deficit, too.
brisbane.
philippines.
zanesville.
couldn't save playlist.
image preview.
doylestown.
you cannot undo a sort operation.
when you become a federal judge all of a sudden you are relegated to a paltry sum.
voters generally agree when they are given a chance to decide if they want to sink their own tax dollars into a new mega-stadium.
therefore, another principal objective of this plan is to alleviate poverty.
yerevan.
status.
first line.
reset compatibility options to defaults.
saving.
not available.
i'dle mak'er.
the restrictions on viewing and dissemination of voice material were especially absurd : an agency in the information business was not being allowed to inform.
library.
document reverted.
select.
she said something like  you just want to make it easy for the school'.
apply clipping path to selection using the topmost object as clipping path.
this disc is called.
does not start with.
microsoft video.
deflate.
he increases the board to seven.
filter length.
antalya.
loopback.
sender.
check.
bears have targeted columbia 's stock because of the thrift 's exposure to the shaky junk market.
open mode not valid.
are you sure you want to permanently delete ?
lightwave object.
could not add the files to the archive.
don't change slider size, just lock it to the minimum length.
expects the second argument to be an integer.
the way that we 've been managing campbell u.s.a. can hopefully spread to other areas of the company  mr. baum said.
table 1, appears to indicate a considerable shortfall in expenditures for survey and training.
the central council of church bell ringers a sort of parliament of ringing groups aims to improve relations with vicars says john c. baldwin president.
sample points.
the revenue surplus stood at 2.8 percent of gross domestic product at current prices in 1974/75 and 2 percent in 1972/73 at constant prices.
the abolition of slavery in 1925 was the most significant social measure.
commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp. : 8.55  30 to 44 days ; 8.25  45 to 59 days ; 8.45  60 to 89 days ; 8  90 to 119 days ; 7.90  120 to 149 days ; 7.80  150 to 179 days ; 7.55  180 to 270 days.
thus, at constant prices the regular expenditure recorded as growth from 2.8 percent in 1972/73 to 4.5 percent in 1989/90.
dealers said the market agreed.
go to the index page.
yahoo! home screen name 3.
whether this tag affects the number of pixels between wrapped lines.
remind me later.
server switch.
denmark.
check menu item.
opacity.
lids are n't even needed.
posterize levels.
silver is also under pressure of  extremely high  inventories in warehouses of the commodity exchange he said.
flush outbox.
mcdermott international inc. said its babcock & wilcox unit completed the sale of its bailey controls operations to finmeccanica s.p.a for $ 295 million.
monitor profile.
despite the modest gains traders said the market remains dull with investors remaining cautiously on the sidelines.
normandin.
timişoara.
solidify.
inner mongolia.
by this september program traders were doing a record 13.8  of the big board 's average daily trading volume.
the most recent example was a nearly $ 17.3 billion fiscal 1990 bill funding the state justice and commerce departments.
posting destination.
excluding one-time additions to profit in each year earnings per share were $ 2.47 up 7.4  from $ 2.30 in fiscal 1988.
security appliance.
also there has been a switch in the past decade to planting of orange trees in areas that were previously used for cane and this change is being felt now she said.
bonobo echo server sample program.
to promote the initiative of private sector and nongovernmental organizations in development works, the government will invest in transport, communications, energy, education and public health and develop infrastructure in various parts of the country.
mr. reupke was one of three executives on reuters 's eight-person executive committee who did n't also serve on the company 's board of directors.
payment required.
windows metafile input.
in 1973 wells fargo & co. of san francisco launched the gold account which included free checking a credit card safe-deposit box and travelers checks for a $ 3 monthly fee.
no extended input devices.
no place on earth is totally free from disaster-causing events.
since continuity in development can not be achieved without a sustained rate of growth, this plan will adopt a self-sustainable development process from the village level onwards.
october sales compared with the previous month inched down 0.4.
due to lack of any fonts, text functionality is not available.
window type.
font selection.
but the court disagreed.
now playing.
la junta.
you have been kicked by.
electricity is a source of energy.
the stocks of uranium are limited.
the lady could not walk, so the man carried her and settled her in his van.
thus, no specific progress was achieved in the development of other types of transport during this period.
show debugging output.
smoke detector.
recursive.
we are prepared to pursue aggressively completion of this transaction  he says.
supermount volume.
oskaloosa.
halftone the image to give newspaperlike effect.
press return.
saturation.
embedded.
change the properties of this folder.
indianapolis.
during this period, a contraction in the money supply was caused by large increase in time deposits and the gradual growth of capital and other items.
tab border.
this provision amounts to a legislative veto over the president 's execution of the law since a one-house resolution could be said to be  duly adopted  even though it would require neither bicameral action in congress nor presentation to the president for his signature or veto.
open preferences for the selector tool.
pixels above lines set.
saint leonard.
no language information available.
yellow.
who 's telling the truth ?
key agreement.
operationalization.
installed.
the planned outlay in the public sector was virtually achieved.
encapsulated postscript.
apply jitter.
it was indeed a prerequisite for rural development.
pixel.
vectors.
asymmetry.
retinex.
as expected a national purchasing managers ' report indicated the nation 's manufacturing sector continues to contract modestly.
the chandler arizona company said it will resubmit the registration to cover only the 2.3 million warrants each exercisable for the purchase of one common share.
in the investment-grade corporate market  it 's rare that you get an opportunity to buy a name that has such broad appeal and has such attractive call features  said james ednie a drexel industrial bond trader.
enclosed alphanumerics.
the mcalpine family which operates a number of multinational companies including a london-based engineering and construction company also lent to meridian national $ 500,000.
sphere designer.
select plugin folders.
whether to scroll to the bottom when a key is pressed.
delete an object.
virginia beach.
edge detection.
minimum size.
view the selected task.
error unable to process extension.
trying to break your application by setting bad values for keys in directory.
authorization given.
stop playback.
north west england.
letter, uppercase.
family pets are improving recovery rates of patients at columbia hospital milwaukee.
value cannot be interpreted as a boolean.
could not connect to shared music.
some attachments are being downloaded. saving the task would result in the loss of these attachments.
america/monterrey.
allows for changing the point values of idle/away/offline states for buddies in contact priority computations.
copy.
clear transparent.
hooper bay.
stroke.
plaintext authentication.
as regards the borrowings of government sector, there occurred and annual growth of 32.2 percent from 1964/65 to 1989/90.
in recent years demand for hybrid seeds has spurred research at a number of chemical and biotechnology companies including monsanto co. shell oil co. and eli lilly & co.
the sad reality is that the retail investor continues to pursue stellar performers first while leaving institutions to grapple with basis points of performance on large sums of money quarter by quarter.
cognac.
error reading find's pipe.
the accelerating rate of obesity among asians, especially children, is indeed alarming.
more than a few ceos say the red-carpet treatment tempts them to return to a heartland city for future meetings.
aomori.
no doc string stored in schema at.
liberal policies aimed at attracting more tourists have also been adopted to encourage the services of foreign airlines.
such books teach him the meaning of family life and virtues of honesty, peaceful living and integrity.
one of the main purposes of school examinations is to improve the quality of education.
barinas.
save options.
farmland is destroyed, natural scenery, in the opinion of some, despoiled.
decrypt files and email sent to you.
think about the good you can do for just $ 15,000 a month about the cost of a mid-size chevrolet or two semesters at a state university.
block.
show the 'finish' button instead of the 'next' button.
zoom to fit page in window.
select timezone.
upper left.
rotate.
corrupted filesystem tarfile  corrupted package archive.
centralia.
the following individuals were fined as indicated and barred from association with nasd members or where noted suspended.
but voters decided that if the stadium was such a good idea someone would build it himself and rejected it 59  to 41.
if set, page border shows a shadow on its right and lower side.
conceição do araguaia.
europe/malta.
in this fast changing world, perhaps nothing changes faster than fashions.
tutorials.
the default grouping method for package views.
workday start minute.
subject public key algorithm.
program class as used by the window manager.
manual.
the speed at which sound travels can of course some times go on polluting the area it covers.
in an era when every government agency has a public-relations machine that sends you stuff whether you want it or not this does seem odd.
last year commonwealth edison had to refund $ 72.7 million for poor performance of its lasalle i nuclear plant.
maintainer.
this usually occurs when you run an older version of aisleriot which does not have the game you last played. the default game, klondike, is being started instead.
taking a cue from california more politicians will launch their campaigns by backing initiatives says david magleby of brigham young university.
perl script.
show hidden.
clearwater.
whether the event box is visible, as opposed to invisible and only used to trap events.
inset and outset commands displace the path by this distance in px units.
font size.
end of file.
plugin can only handle grayscale or indexed images.
fashion is a protest against this shackling of human taste.
icon name.
dataproducts is fighting a hostile tender offer by dpc acquisition partners a group led by new york-based crescott investments associates.
nameserver error.
try bounding box.
commands.
system policy prevents querying keyboard settings.
will be purged because nothing depends on it.
the plan will make all possible efforts in this regard.
the application of new policies and methods of the selection of projects and evaluation, in particular, will result in economy in investment, and the investment units in various sectors will help the growth of production in those areas.
select a single contiguous area.
close this display.
haskell.
code block.
could not parse the geometry spec passed to geometry.
whether the preview widget should take up the entire space it is allocated.
right margin.
at the same time dealers said the u.s. unit has been locked into a relatively narrow range in recent weeks in part because the hefty japanese demand for dollars has been offset by the mark 's strength resulting in a stalemate.
select by.
the aba gives a  qualified  rating to nominees it believes would perform  satisfactorily  on the bench.
schleswig.
the mode of operation of the font picker.
these students who have difficulty assimilating what is taught may then resort to tuition.
print the current page.
to increase agricultural production using appropriate irrigation technologies suited to varying geo-physical and climatic conditions of the country and that cause minimum negative impact on the environment.
scheme ids.
edit.
decrease connection points distance.
blank signature.
you die more.
reserved constant.
home address.
new password.
the son of a physicist mr. hahn skipped first grade because his reading ability was so far above his classmates.
wendover.
debrecen.
switch to workspace 1.
neither the resident, who have to resettle elsewhere, nor the environmentalists, appreciate this.
the causes of corruption in the country are as under:.
weather fog.
font style.
laptop.
another copy.
the texas oil & gas division continues to operate in the red although losses narrowed to $ 9 million from $ 15 million.
as agriculture is the backbone of the national economy and the livelihood of 90 percent of population is associated with this sector, the eighth plan lays special emphasis on the development and modernization of the agricultural sector.
hide completed tasks.
the share of food products and raw materials in the total export was 21.9 percent in fiscal year 1990/91 and 19.4 percent in fiscal year 1991/92.
cursor theme.
first name.
carnival which has three ships on order from waertsilae marine presented claims for $ 1.5 billion damages in the bankruptcy court this week.
open round.
singapore already bans smoking in all theaters buses public elevators hospitals and fast-food restaurants.
use cellspan.
encapsulated postscript with preview using pango fonts.
public.
the increased predominance of the industrial goods in the import trade composition in fiscal year 1990/91 continued to the subsequent year of 1991/92, too.
bump map.
next unread message.
the level of their work increases.
embarking on volunteer activities would enable one to learn survival skills.
document selected from cursor position.
normalize.
you have made changes. forget those changes and close the editor?
if stocks are temporarily  cheaper  than futures for example an arbitrager will buy stocks and sell futures.
permission denied.
no hint available.
he could hear shouts and screams coming from the outside.
the new options carry out part of an agreement that the pension fund under pressure to relax its strict participation rules and to provide more investment options reached with the sec in december.
delete all objects from document.
none of the above.
company.
abbreviated role names.
the aeroplane has been used to save the lives of patients.
the review also showed that while the increase in money supply in the initial years was mainly caused by foreign assets, the same in the subsequent years was caused by excessive internal borrowings.
in malaysia siti zaharah sulaiman a deputy minister in the prime minister 's office launched a  no-smoking week  at the mara institute of technology near kuala lumpur and urged other schools to ban on-campus smoking.
but they should at the same time see to it that it is not used for destruction.
ballot watchers say attention already is focused on the 1990 elections.
the teachers heaved a soft sigh of relief.
is used to notify that the table row header has changed.
green threshold.
authorize.
your certificates.
computer functions only when it is supplied with electricity.
create and edit your own movies.
school canteens must be urged to sell only highly nutritious food and drinks.
i am aware that this is a very bad idea.
so if you like to be a good learner or do something valuable in your life, you must do in time.
fukuoka.
the british department of trade and industry ordered an investigation of the competitive impact of michelin tyre plc 's planned acquisition of national tyre service ltd.
maximum x.
track channel.
autoreply.
could not load game from.
forest massive expansion of organizational structures in the forest sector was carried out in order to conserve the forest area and arrange the supply of forest products during the past period.
movies to play.
external portal.
scroll bar.
create new jobs and bring equality.
as a result ms. ganes said it is believed that little or no sugar from the 1989-90 crop has been shipped yet even though the crop year is six months old.
download location.
could not initialize the threadsafe libraries.
hamamatsu.
powersaved simple output variable.
the index of the child in the parent.
however, before the end of the plan period, the erstwhile democratically elected nepali congress government was dissolved in december, 1960.
provides support for mouse gestures.
connection closed prematurely.
calculator with financial and scientific modes.
the title of the font selection dialog.
building tag database.
when to require passwords.
untitled appointment.
however the following packages replace it.
he was previously president of the company 's eastern edison co. unit.
width of the main window.
filled dot and triangle.
settings for several hardware devices.
the info and temp directories need to be on the same filesystem.
termination.
value at is not a schema.
they like to talk about *-2 having the new red rock terrace -lcb- one of diamond creek 's cabernets -rcb- or the dunn 1985 cabernet or the petrus.
last october the company also bought a wheel-loader manufacturing plant in heidelberg west germany from dresser.
hide panel.
androgynous person.
unable to use current version!
busy at least one logical partition is mounted.
total distinct versions.
we look upon this as a great opportunity to prove the fact that we have a tremendous management team  he said.
operation operator.
no timely availability of water required for irrigation and increasing financial burden on hmg due to disappointing realisation of water cess and consequent need to make large annual budgetary investments in repair and maintenance of the systems.
the desirable act will be to selective and choosy for programmes.
drawables have different size.
at the internal front, the major factors were the reduction in the production of food crops because of adverse weather conditions, the devaluation of the nepalese currency in comparison to convertible foreign currencies leading to the increase in price of raw materials and foreign goods imported from third countries, the immense price rise in indian imports owing to the decline in the production of food and other products as a consequence of adverse weather conditions and the excessive liquidity in the economy.
mr. dingell 's staff was expected to present its acid-rain alternative to other committee members apparently in an attempt to appease midwestern lawmakers from high-polluting states who insist on cost-sharing.
new jersey : the attacks began when democratic rep. james florio aired an ad featuring a drawing of pinocchio and a photograph of mr. florio 's rival republican rep. jim courter.
scroll down.
get the number of elements in a list key.
spider.
check.
combine several images on a film strip.
meadow lake.
vertically aligned arrow.
late yesterday georgia gulf said it reviewed the nl proposal as well as interests from  third parties  regarding business combinations.
windsor locks.
whether this tag affects indentation.
openoffice.org impress presentation template.
the selected source contains no colors.
about this application.
since october 's minicrash wall street has been shaken by an explosion of resentment against program trading the computer-driven lightning-fast trades of huge baskets of stocks and futures that can send stock prices reeling in minutes.
did not understand state in color specification.
light brown.
marianna.
nevertheless, in the working world, a different scenario prevails.
bullet.
leaf final.
contiguous region.
displays the application preferences configuration dialog.
while balance of payment surplus had increased by 7.5 timens in 1989/90 in comparison to 1974/75, trade deficit had increased by 14.3 times.
save file.
the at&t advance shows how one aspect of the current-carrying problem can be overcome.
default' is created.
press return to continue.
attempt to set invalid wide nrc map.
put option march 31 1992 at a fixed 107 7/8 to yield 3.43.
edinburg.
the meeting which is expected to draw 20,000 to bangkok was going to be held at the central plaza hotel but the government balked at the hotel 's conditions for undertaking necessary expansion.
break time.
name of the font family, e.g. sans, helvetica, times, monospace.
partly because of the show mr. watson says the district decided not to recommend mrs. yeargin for a first-time offenders program that could have expunged the charges and the conviction from her record.
assemble.
compression ratio.
network tools.
retinex image enhancement.
postal services :  by the fiscal year 1990/91, there were all together 2231 post offices consisting of 1 general post office, 74 district post offices, 477 area post offices and 1676 additional post offices.
measure.
saturation.
actions.
primary data may be collected through census enquiry or sample enquiry.
science has produced horrible nuclear weapons which have the capacity to destroy the whole world in a fraction of seconds.
channel.
mpeg4 audio.
unmake above.
satellite.
they cite a lack of  imbalances  that provide early warning signals of a downturn.
this and future instances.
when command exits.
rotated.
stardraw drawing.
the deficit between the public sector negative savings and investment will be borne thorough foreign assistance and internal borrowing.
warning group is involved in a cycle.
ordinal.
turbulence.
to provide maximum irrigation facility by implementing financially, technically and environmentally sustainable and cost effective projects with farmers participation.
public key babbleprint.
drifting dust.
labor secretary elizabeth dole said  the magnitude of these penalties and citations is matched only by the magnitude of the hazards to workers which resulted from corporate indifference to worker safety and health and severe cutbacks in the maintenance and repair programs needed to remove those hazards.
similarly, imports from other countries increased to rs. 21,135.4 million in 1991/92 from rs. 16,425.5 millions in 1990/91.
best.
please report this bug to the developers.
africa/bissau.
bakers dozen.
similarly, the number of technical manpower was considerably increased during this period.
compound yields assume reinvestment of dividends and that the current yield continues for a year.
end office.
couldn't write state file.
it is necessary to promote productive investment policies which encourage the private sector to save and to direct their investment from the unproductive sector like real estate to the sectors capable of achieving higher economic growth rate such as industry.
it 's either going to be a shootout or there only may be one player in town  one person said.
goes to next form field.
the layer you selected is a text layer but it has been modified using other tools. editing the layer with the text tool will discard these modifications. you can edit the layer or create a new text layer from its text attributes.
has no override entry.
is not a valid character following the close element name  the allowed character is.
furthermore, even the completed projects have not been possible to be fully utilised.
but the growing controversy comes as many practices historically accepted as normal here such as politicians accepting substantial gifts from businessmen or having extramarital affairs are coming under close ethical scrutiny.
could not export to filename.
nevertheless, in order to assist interested persons interested in of undertaking separate analysis and arriving at relevant conclusions, that data pertaining to the fiscal year 1961/62, 1964/65, 1972/73, 1974/75 and 1989/90 have been presented separately in some tables.
you have changed this task, but not yet saved it.
at the internal front, the major factors were the reduction in the production of food crops because of adverse weather conditions, the devaluation of the nepalese currency in comparison to convertible foreign currencies leading to the increase in pricen of raw materials and foreign goods imported from third countries, the immense price rise in indian imports owing to the decline in the production of food ad other products as a consequence of adverse weather conditions and the excessive liquidity in the economy.
in many other instances there is almost no difference between the real test and learning materials.
duplicate password entry.
display icons in the opposite order.
create automatic playlist.
rows, columns.
error parsing filter.
draw arrow heads on upward arcs.
jan leemans research director said this gene was successfully introduced in oil-producing rapeseed plants a major crop in europe and canada using as a carrier a  promoter gene  developed by robert goldberg at the university of california in los angeles.
internal server error.
mahjongg preferences.
alternate the sign of opacity change for each row.
when enabled, the selected brush will be used for all tools.
delete gradient flare.
select name of the evolution backup file to restore.
the lowing herds of cattle are seen marching to their sheds after a day-long grazing in the fields.
reflected.
add to dictionary.
this increase in manpower demand in expected to take place as a result of the increase in investment in different sectors of the economy and the subsequent rise in value added.
december delivery gold fell $ 3.20 an ounce to $ 377.60.
music.
mr. beall said that he was generally pleased with the latest numbers and cited a particularly strong showing by the company 's electronics segment.
iquitos.
login incorrect.
we could not do anything but stand and watch helplessly.
set a hint to the theme engine to draw rows in alternating colors.
alters edges to make the image seamlessly tileable.
importing.
import.
we now know that holding drug makers liable where there 's no evidence that they or anyone else knew of any risks only means the drugs wo n't be available to anyone.
the soviet purchases are so massive that exporters are struggling to find enough river barges and trains to move the recently harvested midwest crop to ports for loading onto soviet ships.
robert s. jenkins cambridge mass.
paper storage.
move selection.
normal.
required people and one resource.
integrator  input right.
although in the three periodic plans of the panchayat regime preference was accorded to agricultural sector for intensification and diversification in crops through reforms in the farming system of this country composed of hamlets and villages, the wide gulf between planning and implementation always led to a negative result.
view information about this program.
keep.
this stadium shows that anything government can do we can do better  mr. robbie says.
in that fiscal year the capacity utilization in sugar, cement, brick and tiles and jute sect ors recorded an increase.
keep original surroundings.
america/kentucky/monticello.
the government 's construction spending figures contrast with a report issued earlier in the week by mcgraw-hill inc. 's f.w. dodge group.
bulgarian.
rockhampton.
in order to fully translate such development process into practice, the government will adopt the policy of decentralization.
the interrelationships among projects and alternative investment options were not takes into consideration.
intermediate event  error.
kashi.
use gimp guides.
tracks submitted.
ohrid.
sterling 's firm tone combined with a steady opening on wall street also tempted some investors to come back to the market dealers said.
it's one thing to say you can sterilize and another to then successfully pollinate the plant  he said.
dsa sign only.
thus an institution obligated to make fixed-rate interest payments on debt swaps the payments with another making floating-rate payments.
error checking error no exception.
the british also are scrutinizing program trades.
toggle audio recording from.
total package names.
pick the editor font.
select the color you want from the outer ring. select the darkness or lightness of that color using the inner triangle.
question.
jinotega.
highlight color.
we are the crowd that damaged kathmandu.
on the other hand, loans to the private sector gradually increased.
open a window for composing a mail message.
london serves increasingly as a conduit for program trading of u.s. stocks.
choose base profile.
rectangle select tool select a rectangular region.
skipping  wrong gimp protocol version.
hopedale.
new profile.
it is good for their health.
directory.
username.
on the other hand if it goes way sky high i always sell.
turbulent.
confirm account.
houghton lake.
terms were n't disclosed.
pick the red component of the color.
out of these, there were one general post office, 74 district post offices, 254 subpost offices and 678 additional post offices.
but it faces stiff competition in orange county from the orange county register which *t*-44 sells more than 300,000 copies a day and in the san fernando valley from the los angeles daily news which sells more than 170,000.
on the chicago mercantile exchange s&p 500 futures are not allowed to fall further than 12 points from the previous day 's close for half an hour.
unimportant.
afterwares, family planning and maternity child health projects were implemented in all the 75 districts if the kingdom.
maximize window vertically.
flip horizontal.
none of france 's wine regions can steal a march on burgundy however.
chat theme.
all message headers.
open a nonlocal file.
gamma rays.
save keyboard shortcuts now.
long term conservation is essential if man is to pass on a beautiful planet to future generations.
magenta.
quit dia.
applixware presentation.
he had been a sales and marketing executive with chrysler for 20 years.
san carlos.
curl orientation.
as a result, three private sector airlines have begun their domestic flight operation within one year.
expected list, got.
serve as an activationcontext default is as an objectdirectory only.
future reserved keywords.
real number.
westhaven.
if you do not send a cancelation notice, the other participants may not know the memo has been deleted.
click to place a vertical guide.
builtin constant.
graphics.
roskilde.
any question as to why an author would believe this plaintive high-minded note of assurance is necessary is answered by reading this book about sticky fingers and sweaty scammers.
the percentage change is since year-end.
indent expanders.
control.
horizontal alignment.
hyderabad.
search backwards for.
gradient segment's left endpoint color.
option is too long.
buddy list window.
futures traders respond that low margins help keep their markets active.
now it is well accepted that data communication is equally essential for promotion of better trade and business.
sets the size of the previews in the undo history.
file engine.
upper limit of ruler.
but when the contract reopened the subsequent flood of sell orders that quickly knocked the contract down to the 30-point limit indicated that the intermediate limit of 20 points was needed to help keep stock and stock-index futures prices synchronized.
antialiasing.
lumberton.
whether this tag affects the number of pixels above lines.
text on the progress bar.
not started.
initial size.
standard & poor 's corp. says first boston shearson and drexel burnham lambert inc. in particular are likely to have difficulty shoring up their credit standing in months ahead.
air transport by 1990/91 and 1991/92 there were, including tribhuvan international airport, 43 air fields in the country of different capacities, serving 1 jet plane, 8 avro air planes, 30 twin otters and 4 pilatus porter.
it is also used in soap-making, and in the manufacture of glaze and porcelain enamel.
copyright.
â while the contribution of the cottage industry to the gross domestic produce was 1.4 pecent in 1974/75, this declined to 0.7 percent in 1989/90.
that commercial which said mr. coleman wanted to take away the right of abortion  even in cases of rape and incest  a charge mr. coleman denies changed the dynamics of the campaign transforming it at least in part into a referendum on abortion.
margins.
compromises are possible.
in a recent report the institute of medicine pointed out that certain health problems may predispose a person to homelessness others may be a consequence of it and a third category is composed of disorders whose treatment is difficult or impossible if a person lacks adequate shelter.
description list.
show selection.
search podcast feeds.
output.
during the past two years, there was instability in agricultural production.
whether extra space given to the child should be allocated to the child or used as padding.
show control points.
click to pick path to edit.
the ruling could lead to the cancellation of huge bank debts the london borough of hammersmith and fulham ran up after losing heavily on swap transactions.
the main cause for this intense increase if current account deficit amount was the considerable increase in trade deficit.
file transfer already started.
please enter the person's information below.
although foreign debts can substitute for the difference between investment and savings, they may have adverse effect on the payment of principal and interest and inflation.
specify the type of the value being set, or the type of the value a schema describes. unique abbreviations ok.
subprogram call step.
hide task units.
use delay entered above for all frames.
whether the label is in single line mode.
host gone.
names channel list the users currently in a channel.
we see an even stronger argument against unesco than its unsurprising failure to reform.
this is a demand that must be met regardless of the price of oil  said mr. stevenson.
not a real package.
an ambitious expansion has left magna with excess capacity and a heavy debt load as the automotive industry enters a downturn.
error reading saved state file.
draw as radio menu item.
show menubar.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 2.
applied changes.
check size.
in addition to the extra privacy of these trades the transactions can often be less expensive to execute because the parties do n't have to pay a floor brokerage fee or a specialist 's fee.
dealers said the dollar merely drifted lower following the release wednesday of the u.s. purchasing managers ' report.
change the exponent of the strength.
the opening hours of the school library should over the whole period of the week, where there is demand.
the ministry of health plays a leading role in improving the health of the people.
select time.
pneumatic line, vertical.
the house approved an amendment offered by rep. peter defazio d. ore. that would in addition to the previous criteria also require the department to block the acquisition of an airline if the added debt incurred were likely to result in a reduction in the number of the carrier 's employees or their wages or benefits.
khantymansiysk.
replenish.
mercury.
move up.
as a private company random house does n't report its earnings.
remote connection failed.
invalid object.
the playlist file may be in an unknown format or corrupted.
are you sure you want to disconnect ?
the family planning devices are still not readily available in various parts of the country.
no fill.
mytilíni.
lower.
nomura the world's biggest securities company largely by virtue of its protected home field and industrial bank of japan japan's most innovative and aggressive bank in capital markets abroad captain the opposing sides.
buttons.
the following actions will resolve this dependency.
show tabs.
project plan.
kagoshima.
number of pixels for indentation.
fit into selection box.
commercial paper : high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.65  30 days ; 8.575  60 days ; 8.50  90 days.
alternate the sign of scales for each column.
higher.
standing on a shaded hill in a run-down area of this old textile city the school has educated many of south carolina 's best and brightest including the state 's last two governors nobel prize winning physicist charles townes and actress joanne woodward.
programmed diaobject.
the private sector, in a controlled economy, can not invest independently and make decisions concerning primary activities such as production and sale, which tends to direct the flow if investment not towards sustainable area but towards the areas that deliver shortterm gains this leads to distortions in economy and the economy lose dynamism causing debility in economic structure.
investment and savings in fiscal year 1990/91, gross investment is estimated to have increased at a rate of approximately 28.4 percent to rs. 21,163 million, which stands at 20.1 percent of gross domestic product.
since the reforms went in place for example no state has posted a higher rate of improvement on the scholastic aptitude test than south carolina although the state still posts the lowest average score of the about 21 states who use the sat as the primary college entrance examination.
small extension node.
run.
nothing was copied.
the five of hearts.
drive.
lower selected object.
color display filters.
printing error command returned.
group by.
/conversation/block.
invalid utf8 string in brush file.
most recently mr. veraldi 59 years old has been vice president of product and manufacturing engineering at ford motor co.
other, format.
europe/skopje.
role.
the u.s. wants the removal of what it perceives as barriers to investment ; japan denies there are real barriers.
library prefix where this application was installed.
the clash is a sign of a new toughness and divisiveness in japan's once-cozy financial circles.
context is.
somerville.
select failed.
the password must have a minimum of 8 characters and include one uppercase character and one number.
pärnu.
kalispell.
nuremberg.
guilin.
the discussions are still in preliminary stages and the specific details have n't been worked out between the seattle aerospace company and kawasaki heavy industries ltd. mitsubishi heavy industries ltd. and fuji heavy industries ltd.
scale each selected object horizontally to match the width of the copied object.
colophon.
mix.
hostnameport.
can't open aptitude extended state file.
remove manual kerns.
the young mind is easily influenced and corrupted.
could not store folder.
the yield fell to 7.88.
clear.
resulting guide bounds 0,0 to 0,0 0 areas.
4.2 health by the fiscal year 1991/92, the number of hospitals reached 111, health posts 816, health centres 18 and ayurved hospitals 155 and during the same period the number of doctors and women health volunteers nurses stood at 1,182 and 24,000 respectively.
request failed.
africa/gaborone.
close this window.
threshold alpha.
horseshoe.
if you were not an effective crook you found yourself out in the cold a fate that eventually befell mr. mariotta the firm 's semiliterate  minority  person.
prevent the user from modifying print settings. for example, this would disable access to all applications' "print setup" dialogs.
these nations ' internal decisions  will be made in a way not to offend their largest aid donor largest private investor and largest lender  says richard drobnick director of the international business and research program at the university of southern california 's graduate school of business.
moving head.
failed to create file '.
tools.
the company had no comment on whether a replacement would be named.
during the three decades of the panchayat regime, there was never a dearth of attractive fundamental reform programmes and slogans.
change the settings which affect how package dependencies are handled.
goes to next list.
email message/mailbox.
save search.
replaces.
connecting to server.
select all.
create and edit text objects.
reset all preferences.
invalid error.
reverse sort order.
search for.
minehelp.txt.
missing argument for.
angle offset.
this is the year the negative ad for years a secondary presence in most political campaigns became the main event.
the column number to attach the left side of the child to.
kyrgyzstan.
by attending to the vehicle regularly a lot of miseries could be avoided.
failed to read the symbolic link.
open preferences for the pencil tool.
and some grain analysts are predicting that corn prices might gyrate this month as exporters scrounge to find enough of the crop to meet their obligations to the soviets.
north battleford.
metallgesellschaft ag said it agreed to acquire 51  of lentjes ag from the ferdinand lentjes foundation.
whirling and pinching.
what she did was like taking the law into your own hands.
signature exists, but need public key.
whether this tag affects the foreground color.
alignment.
left tab.
blurring.
revoke.
it's going to be a tough league  promises the 47-year-old mr. campaneris.
/conversation/insert image.
switch to tab 4.
new york financier saul steinberg sought federal permission to buy more than 15  of united airlines ' parent ual corp. saying he might seek control of the nation 's second-largest airline.
add handle.
other, surrogate.
additive.
the depth and extent of poverty, unemployment, the growing disparity between rural and urban sectors and unequitable distribution if development efforts on the days to come.
will be purged.
prievidza.
text color.
pollution of water in rivers has caused a great disadvantage for people themselves.
cannot change to folder because it is not local.
nicolet.
trinidad and tobago.
app id.
semiflattening.
these steps will make important contribution in alleviating poverty in rural areas.
the file has no encoding specification assuming it is encoded in.
horizontal jumper.
get list usage information.
could not remove.
score.
while in the beginning the kathmandu valley alone was the centre of attraction, a substantial increase in the number of tourists took place during this period due to the extension of trekking, mountaineering, national parks and other places of touristic attraftion outside the valley.
dalhart.
show information about the current file.
we started using technological instruments for our health fitness.
smudge.
class 4/5 switch.
invalid value for token.
shear.
curve type.
/conversation/add.
crescent city.
applying changes.
loading icons.
in fact the student had the answers to almost all of the 40 questions in that section.
analysing files.
recommends.
map the image to an object plane, sphere, box or cylinder.
no such package.
could not deactivate swap.
in view of this fact during the eighth plan period, a conducive environment will be created for development by complementing capital investment with reforms in the age-old traditional social norms and values and inefficient administrative system fostered by the panchayat regime.
a column in the data source model to get the strings from.
to color.
verb unknown.
the left overs after processing provide rich natural fertilizer.
a file with the same name already exists. please use a different name.
fork/union.
the male part the anthers of the plant and the female the pistils of the same plant are within a fraction of an inch or even attached to each other.
large title font.
people nearby.
therefore, the eights plan has adopted in its formulation some policy bases such as the allocation of investment in high productive areas in keeping with the priorities accorded by the plan the attainment of performance efficiency in industry, communications, trade, hotel keeping, finance and real estate, through appropriate management of government expenditure control of government expenses introduction of suitable selection process and workperformance monitoring systems in the formulation and implementation of the plan promotion of private sector involvement in the economy through economic liberalization and privatization and maintenance of proper balance and coordination among economic growth rate, availability of resources and other macro variables.
you are trying to create an image with a size of.
untitled application.
acoustic energy.
signs of a slowing economy are increasing pressure on the federal reserve to cut short-term interest rates but it is n't clear whether the central bank will do so.
distance is unknown.
color to draw hyperlinks.
africa/tripoli.
like other forms of arbitrage it merely seeks to take advantage of momentary discrepancies in the price of a single product in this case a basket of stocks in different markets in this case the new york stock exchange and the chicago futures markets.
with status.
press any key to continue.
the dow jones industrial average which had jumped 41.60 points on tuesday drifted on either side of its previous close and finished with a gain of just 0.82 at 2645.90.
apply the style of the copied object to selection.
full name.
and patrick mannix 46 international technical manager becomes director of group quality programs.
advanced.
the commission is expected to rule on the braidwood 2 case by year end.
organizer has removed the delegate.
transmit.
removing red eye.
archive size.
shell archive.
slovenia.
please enter the name of the user you wish to invite, along with an optional invite message.
delay.
change systemwide settings affects all users.
in other commodity markets yesterday : energy : petroleum futures were generally higher with heating oil leading the way.
linked offset.
dockable.
this will produce a comparative advantages especially in energy oriented industries and irrigated cultivable land.
instead, the total consumption expenditure during the past 16 years rose from 90 percent of gdp in 197475 to 93.9 percent in 1989.90.
cannot save images with alpha channel.
couldn't import keys.
save color values from transparent pixels.
however none of the big three weeklies recorded circulation gains recently.
ngaoundere.
keep original.
not a launchable item.
because of persistent dry weather in the northern plains the water level on the upper section of the mississippi river is so low that many river operators are already trimming the number of barges their tows push at one time.
each day that congress fails to act  will cause additional disruption in our borrowing schedule possibly resulting in higher interest costs to the taxpayer  treasury secretary nicholas brady said in a speech prepared for delivery last night to a group of bankers.
found and replaced one occurrence.
delete selected tasks.
edit as new message.
show gnome options.
forwarded message.
security.
backward stepper.
the window gravity of the window.
error reverting file.
replicate segment.
parchim.
packaged software or standard software.
list of possible captions on icons.
a jackson requirement.
iringa.
then, after school, they are faced with piles of homework.
network servers icon visible on the desktop.
option selection.
message digest.
expanded as necessary.
block 6, 46.
gasoline futures were mixed to unchanged.
couldn't open for writing.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 10.
metadata.
sir peter walters 58-year-old chairman of british petroleum co. until next march joins the board of this cement products company on dec. 1.
command not implemented.
debian version.
only foreground.
if unchecked the mapping will put the bottom row in the middle and the top row on the outside. if checked it will be the opposite.
package is not available, but is referred to by another package. this may mean that the package is missing, has been obsoleted, or is only available from another source.
it will be made mandatory that the bodies at all levels keep their accounts transparent.
pneumatic.
log files to open up on startup.
make whole.
the gtkadjustment connected to the progress bar deprecated.
the process that brings positive change is commonly known as development.
dayrestan.
western union indeed wanted to get into the telephone business.
syria.
enable modifier keys.
protanopia insensitivity to red.
spool folders cannot be renamed.
the company also cited interest costs and amortization of goodwill as factors in the loss.
if you don’t grab the chance now, you will only have to regret in your old age.
modem interface.
hold.
open the selected messages in a new window.
the agriculture of nepal can be improved by providing adequate irrigation.
must specify a key or keys to get type.
base card king.
material properties.
eventually computers will allow people to work from home.
it is essential to canalize the aspirations and enthusiasm of the people generated by the political change in the country to the mainstream of development, and to identify, formulate, implement and distribute the benefits thereof on the basis of people's participat ion.
new window.
toolbar detachable.
the new policy have brought and end to the doubts, uncertainties and distortions prevailing is the industrial sector.
grants.
close without saving.
man required energy for working out projects, and for his safety from the animal world.
the contents of the entry.
failure version mismatch, upgrade your client.
store root is not an absolute path.
economic situation:1.
failed to connect to imap server in secure mode.
smtp mail delivery via.
the regular expenditure increased by 18.4 percent at current prices and 7.9 percent at constant prices during the period from 1972/73 to 1989/90 the regular expenditure compared to gdp was 6 percent at current prices in 1972/73, which reached 7.3 in 1989/90.
export the active path.
the four of spades.
cannot create cms message.
option must be used by itself.
forget new packages.
west.
autocompletion.
forbidden.
section 501 of the united states information and educational exchange act of 1948 says voice material shall be available to certain of us but now thanks to the usia 's new position all of us  for examination only.
several times chinese guards have pointed their automatic rifles at young children of u.s. diplomats and clicked the trigger.
lighter.
delegated from.
no previous song.
yeovilton.
and my newspaper can print the text of those broadcasts.
for the period ended sept.30 it earned 16.68 billion yen us$ 116.7 million up from 12.68 billion yen the year before.
has set the topic to.
america/losangeles.
always carboncopy cc to.
i never had any clients at all.
this and prior instances.
unknown.
is used to notify that the table row description has changed.
failed at message of.
even the professional musician practices at home.
path cannot be lowered more.
time elapsed.
error while performing operation.
rotate text layer.
save hidden object types.
you type.
/conversation/invite.
lifeline.
barquisimeto.
the increase in money supply during the plan period will be lim ited to 12.1 percent per annum, which will help in limiting inflation to about 9 percent.
cisco  computer.
initial/end state.
construction expenses of small and medium projects will be jointly borne by his majesty's government and the users.
type of bevel around toolbar buttons.
you don't have enough free space in.
palacios.
the rehabilitation of the environment in terms of the magnitude of degradation that has occurred has become a momentous task for a century.
london share prices were bolstered largely by continued gains on wall street and technical factors affecting demand for london 's blue-chip stocks.
axes.
although the growth rate which appears in the structure of domestic product will be only marginal and the agricultural sector continues to hold the major share up to the end of the plan period, these changes will certainly contribute to the creation of new employment opportunities and an accelerated growth in the non-agricultural production.
effective implementation of defined policies.
right neighbor.
galena.
orient.
side pane.
so the next step i suspect is to try to get the law changed.
mailing list.
december silver declined 6.50 cents an ounce to $ 5.2180.
richard driscoll vice chairman of bank of new england told the dow jones professional investor report  certainly there are those outside the region who think of us prospectively as a good partner.
unknown song uri.
lawyers worry that if they provide information about clients that data could quickly end up in the hands of prosecutors.
show active brush, pattern  gradient.
the filter pattern to filter the file browser with. this filter works on top of the filtermode.
rename file.
valentine.
one railroad for example is already increasing its grain hauling service from indiana to baltimore.
tool to switch between workspaces.
the user's profile is empty.
choose here.
political and currency gyrations can whipsaw the funds.
audio output type.
animation.
contents.
eating more local fruits instead of imported ones will help in foreign exchange.
although agriculture sector contributes the most to gross national production, the development in irrigation has been less than expected.
error modifying list.
moving rapidly through school he graduated phi beta kappa from the university of kentucky at age 18 after spending only 2 1/2 years in college.
error saving image.
xft rgba.
cursor size.
the latest results include some unusual write-downs which had an after-tax impact of $ 4.9 million.
removing animation background.
replace with.
major time step.
by 1987 then-speaker jim wright was discussing arms control in moscow with mikhail gorbachev and then attempting to direct the president through an appropriations rider to treat the soviets as though the senate had ratified salt ii.
execute a command.
if the disparity in urban and rural income is not reduced, this trend my gain greater momentum.
none of the scams show much ingenuity : auditors found crookery the first day on the job.
module.
section 605 also imposes unconstitutional conditions on the president 's ability to nominate candidates of his choosing.
internal error, allupgrade broke stuff.
maximum filesize for thumbnailing.
fontchooser.
is already the newest version.
package diverts others to.
reading is the end product of writing.
africa/tunis.
permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of the unicode data files to deal in them without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies.
the plan has made additional efforts to increase the productivity of the productivity of the labour force and to make the financial investment more productive.
get delivery notification when your message is read.
percentile.
salzburg.
installation log.
does nothing.
e. guigal 's 1982 cote rotie la landonne for example is $ 120.
presentation.
transform patterns.
africa/kinshasa.
allow temporary spots use.
they are barking up the wrong tree because it is basically their fault they ca n't attract new employees.
headers visible.
installation date.
virtual packages these packages do not exist they are names other packages use to require or provide some functionality.
house-senate conferees approved major portions of a package for more than $ 500 million in economic aid for poland.
people close to the utility industry said mr. dingell 's proposal appears to guarantee only an estimated seven-million-ton cut in annual sulfur-dioxide emissions that lead to acid rain though additional cuts could be ordered later.
select a filename to save.
however, since these reforms will help achieve stability in the economy, they will facilitate the task of reducing the rate of inflation in the years to come.
most important ms. ganes noted  brazilian officials said that no decision has as yet been made on the suspension of exports.
program traders argue that a reinstatement of the rule would destroy the  pricing efficiency  of the futures and stock markets.
background stipple set.
you cannot put text on a rectangle in this version. convert rectangle to path first.
the emphasis on efficient and economicgrowth oriented sectors and the subsequent desirable structural changes in the eighth plan will provide considerable advantages to the economy during and even after the eighth plan period.
the court rejected strict liability for prescription drugs citing the huge hidden social costs.
they want assets they want a balance sheet which has no relation to the business a company can generate.
sets the text to appear in image window status bars.
size of font, relative to default size.
this may be dangerous for younger children.
sci systems slipped 7/8 to 10 on volume of 858,000 shares.
running man.
genesis rom.
btr plc a u.k. industrial conglomerate said in june it had sold its national tyre service business to michelin investment ltd. a u.k. unit of the tire maker for # 140 million $ 221.4 million.
multiswitch device.
they may be studying only to get good examination results, rather than a rounded education.
telecommuter house.
a usx spokesman said the company had n't yet received any documents from osha regarding the penalty or fine.
continue operation.
what degree of hinting to use hintnone, hintslight, hintmedium, or hintfull.
select objects to lower to bottom.
the rights which expire nov. 21 can be exercised for $ 100 each.
modular switching system.
move the selected controller down.
japan not only outstrips the u.s. in investment flows but also outranks it in trade with most southeast asian countries although the u.s. remains the leading trade partner for all of asia.
incorrect type for list element in.
in october 1989 16.9  said more jobs will be created in the coming six months compared with 17.4  in september and 18.6  in october 1988.
missing.
goes to the last cell in a table.
last year mitsubishi international corp. the new york-based arm of mitsubishi corp. bought controlling interest in the glass company in a joint venture with ronald bodner a glass industry executive and mitsubishi consultant.
background.
only five of the 40 questions were geography questions.
images for the cap faces.
button extra.
enable automatic placing of flags.
overseas import increased considerably due to the country wise and productwise diversification of import during this review period.
receptacle.
version string has embedded spaces.
in parts of iowa for example some grain elevators are offering farmers $ 2.15 a bushel for corn.
waiting for transfer to begin.
skip blank cells.
an unknown sender.
cut text.
topeka.
alleghany corp. said it completed the acquisition of sacramento savings & loan association from the h.n. & frances c. berger foundation for $ 150 million.
châteaudun.
unsupported stanza type.
if true, the terminal will use the desktopglobal standard font if it's monospace and the most similar font it can come up with otherwise.
placement.
cursor right.
if set, rectangular page border is shown.
help browser to use.
unable to accept connection.
firefox.
could not parse alpha value in blended color.
matching the spirit if the challenge, the government has been striving for reforms in economic management by according priority to liberal economic policies and rural areas.
sort by time left.
progress options.
niagara falls.
by status.
gnome is a free, usable, stable, accessible desktop environment for the unixlike family of operating systems.
reply to sender.
contact information for.
mwanza.
move down.
devices.
end index.
quick reference.
bcc.
no economic changes were brought about in the life style of the majority of the population.
you do not have the permissions necessary to save the file. please check that you typed the location correctly and try again.
speak spread sheet cell coordinates.
optional information.
open a recently used file.
mary's harbour.
we want to see the glass market from the inside not the outside.
or so the slogan might go.
duplicate selected objects.
water cooler, vertical.
remove the queens.
removed line.
followup.
2. industry, tourism and electricity.
but its 17 big junk holdings at year end showed only a few bonds that have been really battered *-2.
versions will not be shown.
while acknowledging one month 's figures do n't prove a trend mr. bretz said  it does lead you to suspect imports are going down or at least not increasing that much.
braille.
storage array.
previous.
therefore, the national planning commission has accorded priority to the collection of additional data and the extension of planning methodology.
layer cannot be raised higher.
msn home screen name 1.
channels.
pacific/palau.
will be removed.
support.
hadson corp. said it expects to report a third-quarter net loss of $ 17 million to $ 19 million because of special reserves and continued low natural-gas prices.
shearson  really only has $ 300 million of capital  says mr. bowman of s&p.
unused.
move on toolbar.
paynesville.
couldn't clean out list directories.
portable document format.
in the fiscal year f.y. 1990/91 (at f.y. 1974.75 constant prices), the shares of an agricultural and non- agricultural sectors in gross domestic product were respectively 59.4 percent and 42.1 percent, which are expected to be 57.9 percent and 42.1 percent respectively in f.y. 1991/92.
cape race.
type the email address of the buddy you are searching for.
certificates of deposit : 8.09  one month ; 8.04  two months ; 8.03  three months ; 7.96  six months ; 7.92  one year.
the update command takes no arguments.
spots.
max. memory.
rename text layer.
barnsley 3.
destination folder does not exist. do you want to create it?
the court noted the new usia position but just in case officially found  that congress did not intend to preclude plaintiffs from disseminating usia information domestically.
cubism.
gradient file is corrupt segments do not span the range 01.
system.
anchorage.
the selected color scheme cannot be installed.
documenters.
create spirals.
no valid mirror found.
count.
heating/cooling coil, vertical.
and not just for the players.
exiting learn mode.
whether the rendered pixbuf should be colorized according to the state.
when scientific progress moves into uncharted ground there has to be a role for society to make judgments about its applications  says myron genel associate dean of the yale medical school.
chinandega.
lampang.
the continental baking business benefited from higher margins on bread and on increased cake sales it added.
the average long term growth rate in domestic product was merely 3 percent and this was responsible for the lack of growth in per capital inco me.
the main contributing factors for this can be attributed to the various efforts of the government for the development of the non-agricultural sectors.
multimedia systems selector.
rotation.
remove clipping path from selection.
dialing 900 brings callers a growing number of services.
unable to get a cursor.
pacific/kiritimati.
mr. spoon said the plan is not an attempt to shore up a decline in ad pages in the first nine months of 1989 ; newsweek 's ad pages totaled 1,620 a drop of 3.2  from last year according to publishers information bureau.
must specify at least one package to fetch source for.
how many recently opened image filenames to keep on the file menu.
a palindrome.
column spacing.
we have to have a system that says to those largest investors :  sit down ! you will not panic you will not put the financial system in jeopardy.
however, despite the reduced investment, there may be considerable negative savings accumulation in the public sector.
rimini.
show contact list in rooms.
open tab.
load a fractal from file.
4.2 health: by the fiscal year 1991/92, the number of hospitals reached 111, health posts 816, health centres 18 and ayurved hospitals 155 and during the same period the number of doctors and women health volunteers (nurses) stood at 1,182 and 24,000 respectively.
add.
execute.
unloading text markup backend module.
uri not loaded.
but trading was very sketchy as investment decision makers remain wary from gyrations and upsets of recent weeks.
memory document.
confirm scaling.
replace.
in this context, it has become essential to make maximum possible utilization of existing physical facilities, manpower and service and to extend additional facilities to rural areas.
if this is set to true, icons linking to mounted volumes will be put on the desktop.
the image you have selected is large. do you want to resize and store it?
the materials in each set reach about 90 students.
efforts are currently underway to rectify this situation.
next message.
columbia a longtime drexel client wo n't provide current data on its junk.
bergerac.
skip forward.
exists.
choose library location.
could not get a selection to modify.
couldn't read spline info.
prompt for a format.
christiansted.
default browser.
key bindings.
the capacity utilization of jute goods and beer industries was above 70 percent.
a disaffected hard-drinking nearly-30 hero sets off for snow country in search of an elusive sheep with a star on its back at the behest of a sinister erudite mobster with a stanford degree.
length of key.
speed unit.
the company said the publisher 's annual sales volume increased to $ 800 million from $ 40 million during mr. bernstein 's tenure.
localization.
jaguar 's own defenses against a hostile bid are weakened analysts add because fewer than 3  of its shares are owned by employees and management.
the major share of the private sector was attracted towards the unproductive areas such as real estate.
statesville.
priority will be given to the construction of lowcost projects for their sustained operation through maximum mobilisation of available resources with the participation of government and semigovernment organisations and private and nongovernment sector.
faribault.
banks have tried packaging before.
kankakee.
changes made to the document in the last minute will be permanently lost.
czech.
may stores st. louis runs such well-known department stores as lord & taylor.
firstly, there was a gradual increase in the share of foreign assistance in the development expenditure.
failed to unlink.
commaseparated text document.
the problem of unorganized housing and urbanization has acquired great magnitude.
this phenomenon corroborates the fact that the economy is increasingly becoming dependent on loans and the flow if financial resources channeled directly towards economic and social services for development is very much limited.
second the dollar is showing persistent strength despite a slowdown in the u.s. economy shown by economic indicators.
man's comforts have increased and his powers strengthened.
telecommunication service a total of 57,320 telephone lines were distributed in 38 urban areas by mid january 1991, with one line serving 3200 people.
the shard of deficit fincance is expected, especially in 1990/91, to be 1.0 percent at current prices and 0.6 percent of gdp at constant prices, and thus the share of the same in internal resource mobilisation is estimated to be only 22.1 percent.
select the first solution to the dependency problems.
isabel.
processing error.
universal access settings.
running man subdued.
localdirector.
change grid background color.
used for converting to cdquality audio, but with a lossless compression codec. use this if you later want to edit the file or burn it to cd.
comment list.
imperatriz.
choose 203 business executives including perhaps someone from your own staff and put them out on the streets to be deprived for one month of their homes families and income.
set a key to a value and sync. use with type.
edit audio profile.
find a word or phrase in the document.
many projects were not justifiable from economic and social points of vies.
unmatched quotation mark in command line or other shellquoted text.
end point.
pacific/chatham.
right double quote.
initial title.
hondo.
in early trading in tokyo thursday the nikkei index fell 63.79 points to 35500.64.
trujillo.
finished loading.
default units.
dependency problems  leaving unconfigured.
unknown user.
it has, therefore, become very essential to maintain coordination between the choice of crops and the provision of irrigation facility.
message.
use macros instead of struct.
his longer analysis of executive power and the appropriations clause is to appear in the duke law journal later this year.
tagalog.
engrave.
a unit definition will only be saved before gimp exits if this column is checked.
similarly, with the objective of achieving full convertibility if the nepalese currency in current account, a partial convertibility system was introduced.
the width of the layout.
is focus.
firstly, the selection of appropriate projects and new policies of evaluation will give rise to increased efficiency in various sectors.
telerate 's two independent directors have rejected the offer as inadequate.
open a recently used archive.
delegated to.
this is disabled due to security considerations.
nizhnevartovsk.
underline set.
to edit a shortcut key, click on the corresponding row and type a new accelerator, or press backspace to clear.
slave lake.
the two banks merged in 1985.
shutdown request received.
width of the window.
we 're offering this plan now because we feel it 's the right time.
base card.
hebrew.
create a new task list.
pages to load e.g. 14 or 1,3,57.
sets an upper limit to the memory that is used per image to keep operations on the undo stack. regardless of this setting, at least as many undolevels as configured can be undone.
play movies and songs.
blur center.
san javier.
national development is not possible without the development of efficient and skillful human resource.
convert.
on the frankfurt stock exchange share prices closed higher in fairly thin trading as selective buying by foreigners helped propel prices.
show partial search results incremental search.
general options.
web log.
source channel in file.
tokenring.
corporate executives resent that their company 's stock has been transformed into a nameless piece of a stock-index basket.
user manual.
group 'mail' not found. creating the user mailbox file with 0600 mode.
he added  there 's nothing very hot.
loading from.
display the debian changelog of the selected package.
sandakan.
please fill out the information below to register your new account.
commodity prices have been rising in recent years with the farm price index hitting record peaks earlier this year as the government curtailed production with land-idling programs to reduce price-depressing surpluses.
while teacherstudent ration was 125 at the primary class class 1 3 level in 1961, it increased to 139 by april 1990.
glass pane.
ciscosecurity.
under the given circumstances, the policies of macro economic stabilization and structural adjustments can play a significant role in the attainment of the objective of stability in economic growth rate.
are blacktopped, 103 kms. graveled and 371 kms. fair weather roads.
formosa.
false removes outside bevel from entry.
dia version.
road section.
to right.
ethernet bus.
similarly, in comparison with other development regions, far western region and mid western region lag far behind in respect of infrastructural and social service facilities and other development works.
last month judge curry set the interest rate on the refund at 9.
change the visibility of this window's side pane.
shear.
duplicated context id.
hole offset.
matrix.
windows.
but about 25  of the insiders according to sec figures file their reports late.
any folder.
rename.
do not split words over two lines.
rocky mountain house.
browning.
week view.
oshkosh truck attributed the downturn in its earnings to higher start-up costs of its new chassis division a softer motor-home market and higher administrative costs of compliance with government contractor regulations.
in singapore a new law requires smokers to put out their cigarettes before entering restaurants department stores and sports centers or face a $ 250 fine.
resize layers.
information type.
mr. karns continues as chairman.
could not open for writing.
select source file.
roederer cristal at $ 90 a bottle sells out around the country and taittinger 's comtes de champagne blanc de blancs is encroaching upon that level.
preferred width.
thus, the plan has emphasized on bigger investment in rural areas for the development of nonagricultural activities such as development and renovation of infrastructure, expansion of agriculture through the use of electricity and cottage industries based on local energy resources.
workspace switcher.
other media.
not found.
dvi documents.
cadillac.
change the width of the window to width.
reply style.
america/newyork.
0 seconds.
firewall subdued.
whether one likes it or not, one cannot do without neighbors.
that pretty much defeats any inkling that she was out to help the poor underprivileged child  says joe watson the prosecutor in the case who is also president of greenville high school 's alumni association.
column.
it is the root cause of many of the existing problems of nepal such as population growth, environmental degradation and social anomalies.
address book properties.
bucharest.
radius.
show thumbnails.
but it is a virtual package.
failed to open gflare file.
after numerous occurrences of questionable teacher help to students texas is revising its security practices.
steamboat springs.
enter the items you want to select, separated by spaces.
he believes in what he plays and he plays superbly.
sandberg.
pulseaudio sound server.
requiring the removal of.
edit.
neither the targeted growth rate was achieved, nor was poverty alleviated.
connection point.
select all items in this window.
gane and sarson.
visby.
create a new window.
document ' is empty?
display version and exit.
john rowe president and chief executive officer of new england electric said the company 's return on equity could suffer if it made a higher bid and its forecasts related to ps of new hampshire such as growth in electricity demand and improved operating efficiencies did n't come true.
xpm image.
it is estimated that government agencies will be able to supply a total of 15,850 million cubic feet of timber of different types during the plan period.
later from 1975 onwards it was felt that the foreign trade and the balance of payments situation needed to be coordinated with other aspects relation to monetary, fiscal, foreign exchange and production of the country and due attention should be paid to the close interrelations among them while formulating the economic policy.
collisions.
show animated images as animations.
use mouse control to warp image areas.
the default width of the side pane in new windows.
app version.
print the list of memos.
the average seven-day simple yield of the 400 funds was 8.12  down from 8.14.
mineral'nyye vody.
west  southwest.
saint petersburg.
square root.
a popular graphics file format for clipart.
sharpness.
pounce who.
compatible with the nature of projects and development programmes, conducive environment will be created to involve peasants, laborers and entrepreneurs, engaging the concerned people themselves and the central and effective source of all actions and decisions.
they desperately needed somebody who showed they cared for them who loved them.
requested action aborted error in processing.
home phone 2.
current selection.
recommended packages.
the number of discrete blocks in a progress bar when shown in the discrete style.
web browser.
the appropriations clause states that  no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law.
ottawa.
profiles.
they wo n't buy if the quality is not there  said cedric martin of martin wine cellar in new orleans.
grab a window instead of the entire screen.
these growth rates were insufficient to cope with the increasing development expenditure.
size mismatch.
when the door closed, i was jammed against the door of the bus.
edit startup program.
in the absence of convenient and likelihood of reducing the reliance on traditional sources of energy like forests in the immediate future.
feeding frenzy  henry holt 326 pages $ 19.95 a highly detailed account of the wedtech scandal begins on a reassuring note.
spell checking languages.
new file.
preserve luminosity.
largest possible value for the "position" property.
selectable.
tools such as fuzzyselect and bucket fill find regions based on a seedfill algorithm. the seed fill starts at the initially selected pixel and progresses in all directions until the difference of pixel intensity from the original is greater than a specified threshold. this value represents the default threshold.
at one point mr. phelan angered the subcommittee 's chairman rep. edward markey d. mass. by not going much beyond what already had been reported in the morning newspapers.
tupelo.
browser.
newsgroups.
if true, the child expands and shrinks along with the paned widget.
the purchases show the strong interest of japanese investors in u.s. mortgage-based instruments fannie mae 's chairman david o. maxwell said at a news conference.
mr. lane 's final purpose is n't to glamorize the artist 's vagabond existence.
consequently, this led to an increased and heavy dependence of the economy on foreign aid.
whether the action is enabled.
loop.
the bus was filled to the brim and there was not even much breathing space.
file already exists.
in american stock exchange composite trading citadel shares closed yesterday at $ 45.75 down 25 cents.
but these projects have not enable to provide irrigation facilities to the farmers on time.
cachimbo.
object has no tiled clones.
item not found.
/options.
could not open for writing.
a dam built for one country's benefit may be much to the detriment of another.
sum, subtracting bottom input.
start index.
msn work screen name 2.
maximum image size for thumbnailing.
receiving email.
help on this application.
inset selected paths.
the financial-services company will pay 0.82 share for each williams share.
georgian.
the modeling technique adopted in the eighth plan cannot contribute much to the task of evaluating interregional relationships and the flow of regional means and resources, as it is devoted to the analysis of cumulative constraints as a whole.
the canteen was crowded with campers, all ravenous after the day's activities.
keyboard shortcut to make font normalsize.
railroad companies and some ports are reaping a sudden windfall of business.
hasvik.
floating point.
kalipharma is a new jersey-based pharmaceuticals concern that sells products under the purepac label.
the installation of the tubewells will be gradually be transferred from the government to the private sector.
speech system.
does not exist.
font scale set.
images have different size.
nothing can be better than this  says don sider owner of the west palm beach tropics.
feasibility study reports prepared to date will be made available to the district irrigation office and the indices of such reports will be made available to the concerned district development committee and users ' committees.
4/2 distributor.
ping pong.
robert q. marston president emeritus university of florida and a director of this maker of medical devices was named chairman.
calendar from to.
in addition operating results were hit by an increase in loan and real estate loss reserves.
the costs per hectare of some of the government constructed projects are found to range from re. 60,000 to re 100,000 or more.
show installation options.
actuate.
time ms.
shadow darken.
is a symbolic link pointing to another program.
quicktime movie.
kde application details.
the industrialization, in the process of value added contributes, to the creation of new employment opportunities and economic integration.
feeding frenzy  does provide a few clues.
tree view.
however, no efforts were made towards developing a systematic settlement of the population along the growth or development corridors in desirable proportions and there were not launched, as required, any socioeconomic programmes based on available local means and resources and focusing on the generation of employment opportunities either.
wave audio.
members.
sample merged.
baraboo.
moreover the japanese government now the world 's largest aid donor is pumping far more assistance into the region than the u.s. is.
expected pair, got a pair with one or both values missing.
set current global keyboard.
lennoxville.
filter.
rsa sign only.
set user limit on channel. set to zero to reset user limit.
north rhinewestphalia.
unexpected error in select reading data from a child process.
the el paso texas maker of western boots and leather accessories said the preferred stock would accrue dividends at a 12  rate but would n't be paid for the first two years.
move a card or build of cards on to the empty slot.
memphis.
event with no start date.
grow.
delete episode and file.
specific folders.
parent widget.
in the coming decade analysts say u.s.-japanese relations will be tested as tokyo comes to terms with its new status as the region 's economic behemoth.
image statusbar format.
posadas.
asia/karachi.
touggourt.
camera.
projects yielding quick returns,.
the new formatting is invalid.
key file does not have key in group.
add access provider.
help browser doesn't start.
intrusion action.
you cannot create a folder in a news store subscribe instead.
last submission time.
load playlist.
not in the last.
copy.
as discussed in the context of controlling federal spending the line-item veto is characterized as a way for the president to excise perfectly constitutional provisions in a spending bill that are objectionable merely because they conflict with his policy objectives.
magnify.
unpacking more than once.
usx was cited by osha for several health and safety violations at two pennsylvania plants and may face a record fine of $ 7.3 million.
illegal argument.
whether to enable auto indentation.
a population policy was formulated for this purpose.
delete all occurrences.
previous zoom from the history of zooms.
template parse error near ', in stanza of.
the treasury said it plans to sell $ 30 billion in notes and bonds next week but said the auctions will be postponed unless congress acts quickly to lift the federal debt ceiling.
please provide an unique name to identify this signature.
purge.
invalid entry.
the march delivery which has no limits settled at 14.53 cents up 0.56 cent a pound.
error selecting the window.
romanian.
unable to save icon file to disk.
encoding.
adding user to group.
type operators.
radio state.
gone.
set the character encoding to be used to open the files listed on the command line.
the growth of the export sector has been restricted due to the lack of clearcut export policies and low priority accorded to it in the past.
genres, artists and albums.
sheets and objects.
fresno.
challis.
in california two petition drives for next year 's election are  essentially finished  says david schmidt author of  citizen lawmakers.
this memo has been deleted.
the len 's foldability enables it to be inserted in smaller incisions than are now possible for cataract surgery the eye care and skin care concern said.
go to the previous visited location.
fashion-designing has become a super-specialty.
the undue pressure on them is unhealthy.
offsets.
expects two arguments.
details.
invalid trace information.
start angle.
look both ways before you cross the street.
strikethrough.
in another reflection that the growth of the economy is leveling off the government said that orders for manufactured goods and spending on construction failed to rise in september.
the u.s. and soviet union are holding technical talks about possible repayment by moscow of $ 188 million in pre-communist russian debts owed to the u.s. government the state department said.
kalmar.
it was estimated that irrigation facility was available to about 21 percent of the cultivated land by 1989/90 with the availability of additional irrigation facility to a total of 539,039 ha. of land during the panchayat regime as a result of heavy investment in the irrigation sector during this period.
the number of blocks which can fit in the progress bar area in activity mode deprecated.
because of the board’s limited knowledge and experience, there were serious shortcomings in the plan itself.
in electronics for example a japanese company might make television picture tubes in japan assemble the sets in malaysia and export them to indonesia.
trees remained a perpetual source of heat and energy for several millenniums.
laredo.
changing the password for group.
a little different picture emerges when the level of development outlay and sources of financing are analyzed.
tilable.
sensor  left.
our country nepal is not able to produce highly skilled human resource.
the baker proposal reasserts washington 's intention to continue playing a leading political role in the region.
it 's not easy to roll out something that comprehensive and make it pay  mr. jacob says.
they may even reduce the price to attract customers.
the former is more popular such as polished rice, pasta, white bread and others which have almost no nutritional benefits.
create a new unit from scratch.
whether the widget can be the default widget.
right attachment.
reverse deps.
dobbiaco.
ashgabat.
whether to use a custom font in gtk applications.
slider increase.
toggle quick mask.
to blur.
but much contemporary work is also fetching  a great deal of money  says miles barth of the international center of photography.
europe/nicosia.
guides.
library structure.
your image should be exported before it can be saved as for the following reasons.
measure distances and angles.
mr. bernstein who succeeded bennett cerf has been only the second president of random house since it was founded in 1925.
customize current view.
background color.
ahoskie.
in reality, the people could rarely get true and real messages through the newspaper etc. in spite of the fact that freedom to newspapers etc. plan with the motto of national communication plan with the motto of communication for development was launched in 1971.
right single quote.
winona.
mauritius.
gamma value.
for their part taiwan and south korea are expected to step up their own investments in the next decade to try to slow the japanese juggernaut.
error message.
europe/madrid.
/conversation/invite.
unity express.
the main reasons for the balance of payment to be unfa vourable to the country during these years were the reduction of total export and the excessive increase in import resulting in great trade deficit.
san jose.
the thrift has assets of $ 3.2 billion.
the complications in the export of traditional and some new kinds of manufactured goods and the quantitative decline in the agricultural products have contributed to the narrowing of the agricultural products have contributed to the narrowing of the export base of nepal.
opens the external tools manager.
local mail file.
case sensitive.
style of bevel around the statusbar text.
service type reference.
hopscotch.
note selecting the task " " for installation.
position of the handle relative to the child widget.
basic goods and services are required for livelihood of people.
the bonds are insured and triple-a-rated.
system.
sensor  bottom.
show.
the thumbnail in the open dialog will be automatically updated if the file being previewed is smaller than the size set here.
system log.
speech synthesizer.
reply.
contact certificates.
text of the expander's label.
open preferences for the spiral tool.
deselect all.
connector preferences.
this leaves them little time to indulge in extra-curricular activities or sports.
print preview.
in asia as in europe a new order is taking shape  mr. baker said.
could not open source.
ogg audio.
this field is a hint for numerical input fields. it specifies how many decimal digits the input field should provide to get approximately the same accuracy as an "inch" input field with two decimal digits.
service  maintenance or administration software.
downloaded.
its index inched up to 47.6  in october from 46  in september.
swap.
despite the increase in the number of tourists during this period, no increase in average stay and expenses incurred per day materialized for the lack of proper development and expansion of infrastructures and places of tourist attraction.
bandirma.
tiling primitives.
didn't understand ' extra trailing characters.
/sort objects/as inserted.
this is a company that has invested in capacity additions more aggressively than any other company in the industry and now the industry is growing more slowly and they are suddenly poorly positioned  said michael stark chip analyst at robertson stephens & co.
shortly afterwards mr. bush imposed a series of anti-china sanctions including suspension of most high-level talks which could be codified in u.s. congressional legislation in the coming weeks.
aren’t all of us?
choose password for new keyring.
decrease.
artist  title.
the queen of spades.
no more large objects.
devanagari.
the compromise plan which boosts the minimum wage for the first time since 1981 is expected to clear the senate soon.
did not understand color component in color specification.
calibrate.
use the invisible bottom layer as the base.
these efforts will bring stability to national economy and encourage private sector to increase inv estment in productive activities.
runlength encoded.
tray bon ?
asia/yakutsk.
in october 1988 7.3  said they would buy a car.
your tool options will be reset to default values the next time you start gimp.
tapachula.
error loading desktop file.
system events.
the password may be incorrect.
asia/tokyo.
configure date/time plugin.
get information about the usage of the list this message belongs to.
she had some rather deep cuts on her face and limbs, and her knee was twisted.
it brings change in the lifestyle of people.
elsewhere share prices closed higher in amsterdam brussels milan and paris.
serial bonds are priced at par to yield from 6.40  in 1991 to 7.15  in 1999.
timeout during key agreement.
power manager.
couldn't open ' for stream.
dvd.
public.
optimal estimation.
drawing settings.
remove this column.
unexpected end of stream!
if true, pressing the right mouse button on the notebook pops up a menu that you can use to go to a page.
extract.
the important highways built in the period of past thirty years are the east-west highway, arniko highway, prithibi highway,  gorkha-narayangadh highway, dadeldhura-dipayal-doti highway, dharan-khankuta highway,dhangadi-dadeldhura highway.
unnamed list.
in a similar manner, our social values and norms are also guided by religion.
general punctuation.
the illinois supreme court ordered the commission to audit commonwealth edison 's construction expenses and refund any unreasonable expenses.
active.
europe/zagreb.
fixed width.
paste.
they view this as a growth area so they went about it with a systematic approach  says richard olsen a candela vice president.
guanaja.
breakout box.
please enter your current password and your new password.
airbrush.
print version.
many have even become successful sports persons participating in paralympics games and winning medals.
laptop.
display scale dialog.
armenia.
gas, and bitumen etc.
the hindu, buddhist and other cultural heritage sites of nepal, and around the year fair weather are also strong attractions.
amount.
money can be spent on universities, colleges, schools and training centers.
winnipeg.
the identity of the remote computer  is unknown.
close tab.
copying messages into folder.
videos.
marfa.
the rapid increase in population leaves only an insignificant portion of resources for development works.
fatal parse error in brush file  unknown depth.
in that fiscal year the capacity utilization in sugar, cement, brick and tiles and jute sect ors recorded an increase.
analyzer.
route switch processor.
it all depends upon our conscience whether we want creation or destruction.
now-a-days, everything is done by electricity.
error processing directory.
factory orders and construction outlays were largely flat in september while purchasing agents said manufacturing shrank further in october.
yalign.
unmatched.
contributors.
introduction.
scottsdale.
thunder bay.
play/pause.
the department placed a moratorium on the research pending a review of scientific legal and ethical issues.
tokyo 's leading program traders are the big u.s. securities houses though the japanese are playing catch-up.
it does a first-rate job.
set secret channel.
shared key.
it is a great mistake that the ones involved in it doing.
the other areas given emphasis were transport and communications, power, and agriculture, agricultural extension work and irrigation.
contacts.
free/busy.
shaded.
for this purpose the government will remove the policy obstacles and hindrances being faced by these organizations and adopt promotional policies.
templates.
nanning.
change print size.
create new document.
quicken for windows document.
unnamed.
message received.
with the 1985 vintage they soared higher : la tache $ 195 ; richebourg $ 180 ; romanee-conti $ 225.
preview.
glade project.
show or hide the main toolbox on the left.
create tiled clones.
mark, enclosing.
forbidden version.
and while there was no profit this year from discontinued operations last year they contributed # 34 million before tax.
disconnected by server.
light snow.
w.r. grace holds three of grace energy 's seven board seats.
projects guaranteeing high people's participation projects that can be implemented, operated and maintained by users themselves and projects requiring minimum government investment.
the following packages will be removed.
turbulence.
there has to be a concerted effort to ensure the disabled have access to these places and not feel hampered in anyway.
the declining productivity in the government sectors, the reduction in the share of domestic savings in gross domestic product and the flow of a major share of total private sector investment towards unproductive capital sector such as real estate also have created several problems in the economy.
trekking, mountaineering, rafting in spectacular scenery are just three things nepal is famous for.
this caused residents a great deal of anxiety.
fatal parse error in brush file  unknown version.
gnome app sysconfdir.
do not load brushes, gradients, patterns,.
fort dodge.
therefore, it is necessary to give special emphasis on the mobilisation of internal resources.
wooster.
under terms of the new proposal equus managed by equus capital corp. houston would pay $ 12 cash and one new preferred share with a liquidation preference of $ 1.65 a share for each of tony lama 's 2.1 million shares outstanding.
that measure could compel taipei 's growing number of small video-viewing parlors to pay movie producers for showing their films.
delete this occurrence.
transpath.
fit window to movie.
the federal government suspended sales of u.s. savings bonds because congress has n't lifted the ceiling on government debt.
move here.
there are numerous rivers in nepal which offer excellent rafting or canoeing experience.
click to add a task.
you are about to remove the chat from your buddy list. do you want to continue?
display rendering intent.
changes made to this item may be discarded if an update arrives.
opacity.
activate the workspace.
open the manual.
could not parse as a floating point number.
an official at wako securities said these investors feel the need to make quick profits despite destabilizing external factors such as political uncertainty tied to the ruling party 's fate at next year 's lower house elections - an event which could directly affect the stock market.
paste style.
add word to dictionary.
armenian.
kelso.
completely removed.
has gone away.
whether the selected files should be limited to local file urls.
transport and communication: 3.
http key server.
the market again showed little interest in further evidence of a slowing u.s. economy and traders note that the market in recent weeks has taken its cues more from wall street than u.s. economic indicators.
sent a cancelation notice to the delegate.
new brunswick scientific co. a maker of biotechnology instrumentation and equipment said it adopted an anti-takeover plan giving shareholders the right to purchase shares at half price under certain conditions.
the basic needs programme had adopted a supply oriented approach in its formulation paying no attention to the purchasing power of the proposed consumers.
road safety is a matter of education in which the school can play a significant role.
no image height specified.
before the start of the appointment.
but apple ii was a major advance from apple i which was built in a garage by stephen wozniak and steven jobs for hobbyists such as the homebrew computer club.
create star.
kekaha.
include directive.
whether this tag affects the left margin.
the man had for a long time had  a chaotic sex life  including relations with foreign men the newspaper said.
you may not view or modify password information for.
people's participation is becoming the central issue of current period.
dortmund.
unparsable control file.
left double angle bracket.
empathy is free software you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the gnu general public license as published by the free software foundation either version 2 of the license, or at your option any later version.
operational amplifier.
drop new path.
an exhibition of american design and architecture opened in september in moscow and will travel to eight other soviet cities.
miscellaneous options.
the selected file may not be a gpg key file or it might be corrupt.
circulation pump.
avord.
last month phoenix voters turned thumbs down on a $ 100 million stadium bond and tax proposition.
a user on the computer is remotely controlling your desktop.
sachs harbour.
constructing maze using prim's algorithm.
display the standard forward arrow button.
pretoria.
the sharp stock market decline in late october appears to have had little or no effect on consumers  said fabian linden executive director of the conference board 's consumer research center.
monetary and credit situation the principal objective of the monetary policy of the period under revied was to regulate the rate of money supply at a level sustainable at the actual growth rate of national production and the national economy, to strengthen the financial base by introducing reforms in the financial sector, to make the bank interest rates more realistic by enhancing the efficacy of indirect monetary control measures and the economically deprived people and in the priority sectors.
multiple instance task.
gnome document viewer.
select the language of the current document.
language name.
list index must be nonnegative.
ellipse select tool select an elliptical region.
the server refused access to this file or stream.
even a low-tech product like plate glass can catch a trading company 's fancy if there 's a strategic fit.
fullscreen.
preferred audio format.
grab focus.
roswell.
tracy.
knockout drum with demister pad.
package info.
unmount the volume associated with the open folder.
where a bank once offered a standard passbook savings account it began offering money-market accounts certificates of deposit and interest-bearing checking and staggering rates based on the size of deposits.
treasury securities in a surprise announcement the treasury said it will reopen the outstanding benchmark 30-year bond rather than create a new one for next week 's quarterly refunding of the federal debt.
staunton.
they say that many vehicles classed as commercial light trucks actually carry more people than cargo and therefore should have the same safety features as cars.
position set.
preparing for removal of.
fundamentalists jihad big board chairman john phelan said yesterday that he could support letting federal regulators suspend program trading during wild stock-price swings.
filled dot.
the local election has thus successfully laid down the foundation for a democratic system and the local bodies have now initiated the tradition of playing an important role in development activities in consonance with the policy of decentralization.
insert date and time.
boot loader.
furthermore, as various projects at different stages of implementation are being funded by foreign aid and as their closure would not only entail a wastage of foreign aid in development expenditure and the share of loan in total foreign aid are estimated to be more or less equivalent to those in 1989/90.
replied to.
west palm beach.
desktop icon.
if set to true, newly opened windows will have the location bar visible.
save the edited search.
export.
picture filename.
controls.
although gm has u.s. approval to buy up to 15  of jaguar 's stock it has n't yet disclosed how many shares it now owns.
forward as icalendar.
player backend.
autosaved files exist. please select those you wish to recover.
enable sound on startup.
naturally search for a clean source of energy continued.
they also said that vendors were delivering goods more quickly in october than they had for each of the five previous months.
charles city.
x align.
show filters for mail.
a provision to offer a capital of rs. 7,000 was made to make the biogas plants accessible to rural families.
the information for the page where the image will be printed.
but japan 's power in the region also is sparking fears of domination and posing fresh policy questions.
play minesweeper.
the company also took hits in the fourth quarters of 1989 and 1988 on a fixed-price weapons-modernization development program probably the c-130 gunship according to analysts.
indicator spacing.
solid lines.
port harcourt.
woensdrecht.
system closed for routine maintenance.
mark as incomplete.
jefferson.
you are now chatting in.
come and revel in the untouched and the undiscovered and uncover yourself.
america/jujuy.
a national campaign entitled â€˜back to the villageâ€™ was initiated with a view to providing a village oriented philosophical base to the panchayat regime.
adelaide.
cube root.
clearfield.
unloaded.
my fastball is good.
tifinagh.
whether images should be shown in menus.
default rgb working space.
stop color.
linux console.
whether or not keyboard locking is enabled.
unverified.
penticton.
value propagate.
floating point number.
both dr. mason and dr. sullivan oppose federal funding for abortion as does president bush except in cases where a woman 's life is threatened.
intensity levels.
red oak.
cannot convert to a palette with more than 256 colors.
advanced search.
select mask object and objects to apply clippath or mask to.
yesterday these stocks rose by 170,262 ounces to a record of 226,570,380 ounces according to an exchange spokesman.
your keyboard shortcuts will be reset to default values the next time you start gimp.
a logo for the about box.
blue river.
inline haddock section.
children spend hours in front of televisions and play computer games.
interpolation steps.
color to use for odd rows.
unflow.
include decorations.
first we started with one kilometer, then increased it to one and a half.
bad friend file.
boolean.
port scan.
vertical adjustment for the text widget.
orientation.
although the purchasing managers ' index continues to indicate a slowing economy it is n't signaling an imminent recession said robert bretz chairman of the association 's survey committee and director of materials management at pitney bowes inc. stamford conn.
kushiro.
buddy goes away.
pencil preferences.
average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more.
glencoe.
commonwealth edison is seeking about $ 245 million in rate increases to pay for braidwood 2.
last image.
template in does not contain a 'template' line.
should the luminosity be preserved?
reread all available scriptfu scripts.
subject's public key.
the appointment takes effect nov. 13.
access your private data.
document statistics.
it will be made mandatory that the bodies at all levels keep their accounts transparent.
fetch source.
unknown error.
system monitor preferences.
s/mime decrypt no encrypted content found.
sample plugin.
button gear down.
the calendar is not marked for offline usage.
notifies in a conversation window when a buddy goes or returns from away or idle.
in summer, we get fresh air which is useful for our lungs.
close.
icelandic.
goes to next visited link.
all inkscape files.
in this context, it has become essential to make maximum possible utilization of existing physical facilities, manpower and service and to extend additional facilities to rural areas.
autocrop image.
due to an editing error a letter to the editor in yesterday 's edition from frederick h. hallett mistakenly identified the nrdc.
ms. kirkpatrick the journal 's deputy editorial features editor worked in tokyo for three years.
this is the greatest blot on the face of humanity.
toggle current layer visibility.
statusbar.
time delay.
not that washington and tokyo disagree on the japanese acquisitions ; indeed each has come out in favor of unfettered investment in the u.s.
cyclone and hydrocyclone.
thirdly, compared to the amount of loans sanctioned by foreign donor countries and agencies, their actual utilistation remained considerably low.
picture.
hong kong.
error checking existence of '.
la ceiba.
add in out event port.
schedule meeting.
xalign.
couldn't allocate memory for loading jpeg file.
there was predominance of industrial goods in the total import in fy 1989/90.
subtitle font.
custom.
color name.
europe/paris.
keep aspect ratio.
kuusamo.
look up a network address.
what to do with executable text files when activated.
inuktitut transliterated.
image title format.
the irs is asking lawyers to red-flag a criminal problem to the government  added mr. sonnett a miami lawyer who has heard from dozens of attorneys who received letters in recent days and has himself received the computer-generated irs forms sent by certified mail.
work information.
similarly, tourism sector will be promoted in order to generate increased foreign exchange, employment and income.
display calendar dialog.
keep.
but if columbia could keep its junk bonds separate from the thrift till they mature at full value unless the issuer goes bust or restructures the junk portfolio might do all right.
wilderness tourism.
unknown compression type '!
the company said it has offered to withdraw its bids in hiroshima and nagano.
merge layers.
linux input.
in the first half of 1989 alone japanese corporations invested $ 214 million in minority positions in u.s. companies a 61  rise from the figure for all of 1987 reports venture economics inc.
extra moniker factory.
pattern to objects.
savin corp. reported a third-quarter net loss of $ 35.2 million or 31 cents a share compared with year-earlier profit of $ 3.8 million or one cent a share.
is used to notify that the value has changed.
so far mr. hahn is trying to entice nekoosa into negotiating a friendly surrender while talking tough.
message.
accessible name.
modal dialog box.
lower node.
show one week.
pine ridge.
the holding company said it has been  unfairly associated  with other banks in new england that have had major loan losses in recent quarters.
saving failed.
while population per hospital bed was 9,146 in 1961, this was 3915 in 1990.
full name.
the judge was quoted as referring to the victims as  queers  and saying they would n't have been killed  if they had n't been cruising the streets picking up teenage boys.
send this message.
with all this, the level of educational development varies across the different development regions.
the boolean equation of the condition.
border is unknown.
whether the header can be clicked.
missing date.
pepperdine university economist dean baim scoffs at that.
don't ask me again.
container.
this is a really cool plugin that does a lot of stuff  it tells you who wrote the program when you log in  it reverses all incoming text  it sends a message to people on your list immediately when they sign on.
coordinate expression tries to use mod operator on a floatingpoint number.
dell computer corp. said it cut prices on several of its personal computer lines by 5  to 17.
in most of the british transactions the municipalities agreed to make floating-rate payments to banks which would make fixed-rate payments.
no academic changes evolved in the attitudinal perspective of the students an teachers, unsustainable financial burden increased on the educational sector and public participation was almost obliterated.
all images.
error opening file.
attendees.
character encoding.
expects at least one argument.
we could prevent many of these fatalities with minimum roof-crush standards  he said.
compound document.
public pgp key.
current word.
the two professors represent different ends of the political spectrum mr. kurland is a conservative and mr. tribe is a liberal.
display the standard backward arrow button.
domain kind.
a diagram created with the program sketch.
heavy rain.
a little different picture emerges when the level of development outlay and sources of financing are analyzed.
this message is encrypted, with a strong encryption algorithm. it would be very difficult for an outsider to view the content of this message in a practical amount of time.
the monthly sales have been setting records every month since march.
the final vote came after the house rejected republican efforts to weaken the bill and approved two amendments sought by organized labor.
didn't understand ' expected real number.
channel does not exist in the network.
old.
hail showers.
mountain view.
allow empty.
colleges she says are eyeing registration through 900 service.
modify red channel.
invert bumpmap.
trinity industries inc. said it reached a preliminary agreement to sell 500 railcar platforms to trailer train co. of chicago.
keep window on top.
100 mb.
split segment at midpoint.
it  became clearly evident that the contribution of the increased area was pivotal to whatever increase took place in production growth.
deseret.
extract files from the archive.
column.
polished.
in a prepared statement gm suggested its plans for jaguar would be more valuable *ich*-2 in the long run than the initial windfalls investors might reap from a hostile ford bid.
user is not present in the network.
you don't have enough free space in.
by most measures the nation 's industrial sector is now growing very slowly if at all.
wrapping to top.
version for was not found.
if you could get the rhythm of the program trading you could take advantage of it.
mr. sidak served as an attorney in the reagan administration.
depth of of range, only 0allowed.
it is not unethical to choose a higher-salaried job.
dagger.
activity/data box.
variable width font.
one important climatic feature that plagues the south asian region of the kathmandu valley is earthquakes.
vehicles with brakes and lights that do not function properly are potential hazards to other road users.
the thrift surely could be sold for more than the value of its equity financial industry executives say.
yellow.
rijeka.
the researchers also pulled off a second genetic engineering trick in order to get male-sterile plants in large enough numbers to produce a commercial hybrid seed crop.
loading evolution settings.
delete.
sawtooth.
tentative.
ayacucho.
home phone.
background color as a string.
system tray icon.
4.buy a diamond necklace.
lead developer.
cartesian.
amapala.
you are channel founder on.
while the current account had increased to rs. 10,254.9 million in f.y. 1990/91, it reduced to rs. 9,578.1 in f.y. 1991/92.
despite recent declines in yields investors continue to pour cash into money funds.
lastly, the radio has been improved to enable the audience to actually see the image of the person whom they hear.
the distortions in policy matters, strategies and programmers as well as the weakness in implementation evolved as the characteristic features of the then periodic development planning process.
malayalam.
element was closed, no element is currently open.
those efforts are being stepped up.
gparted.
window.
distribute top edges of targets.
image properties.
max undo.
as a part of the alternative energy development programme, rural electrification was initiated.
stock-index arbitrage buying or selling baskets of stocks while at the same time executing offsetting trades in stock-index futures or options.
azimuth.
considering the above problems, necessary measures will be taken to complete the irrigation projects within the allocated time during the eighth plan period.
character found.
but any potential acquirer must attempt to reach some kind of accord with the company 's employees primarily its pilots and the powerful machinists ' union which has opposed a takeover.
drop artwork here.
campbell 's international businesses particularly in the u.k. and italy appear to be at the heart of its problems.
its subsidiaries ' services are marketed by closely held a.l. williams & associates.
diyarbakir.
unable to list files in.
can't search for.
switch angles.
copy named.
gnome datadir.
set user limit.
numeric literal.
software development/rom images.
mask radius.
internal error setting corner type of endpoint of bezier.
reading from.
what this tells us is that u.s. trade law is working  he said.
background color as a gdkcolor.
record sound clips.
map file format.
food, clothes, shelter, education, health services, drinking water, hygiene, fuel, entertainment, safety, etc are basic things.
in the absence of any political opposition, there did exist the opportunity of channeling the autocration character of panchayat to rapid economic development but, unfortunately, this also did not mathrialise.
bangalore.
save as.
no playlist or playlist empty.
would you like to overwrite it?
chrysler said its trucks and vans already meet the roof-crush resistance standard for cars.
e) as the date relating to the balance of payments situation are available from the year 1974/75 only, the corresponding analysis has been presented beginning from that year.
illustration.
i had sought in my suit the right to print voice material which had been denied me and i had sought a right to receive the information arguing in effect that a right to print government information is n't very helpful if i have no right to get the information.
are you sure you want to disconnect all clients?
the identifier which appears in the lower right corner of the box.
strikethrough.
create as.
loading file ….
it will be mandatory to get the decision of the user's committee if any part of the project needs to be awarded to a contractor.
blinds.
perfect circle.
open preferences for the star tool.
first the trading is done over the counter and is n't reported on either the u.s. or london stock trading tapes.
new internet radio station.
colorify.
if an arrow should be shown if the toolbar doesn't fit.
fitchburg.
downloads.
constant factor below 1.
the st. louis firm specializes in replacement-car rentals those provided by insurance companies for cars damaged in accidents.
octave.
child y displacement.
it 's a cosmetic move  said jonathan s. gelles of wertheim schroder & co.
vertically aligned resistor.
remove, dependencies.
use loglog smoothing.
a new industrial policy has been formulated to intensify the pace of industrial development.
mr. leinonen said he expects ford to meet the deadline easily.
entered the room.
dominica.
no timely availability of water required for irrigation and increasing financial burden on hmg due to disappointing realisation of water cess and consequent need to make large annual budgetary investments in repair and maintenance of the systems.
catalan.
i carried the whimpering child to the van.
raise the current layer to the top.
status field.
allow bold text.
show border shadow.
horizontally aligned compressor.
root or null directory is listed as a conffile.
add guides.
registration failed.
reset password.
the hydroelectricity and irrigation facilities need to be expanded through necessary arrangements of means and resources for the maximum utilization of hydro power.
obihiro.
båtsfjord.
the discovery of petrol of course proved a boon.
the main reason behind the higher growth in industrial production that year can be attributed to the convenient supply of industrial raw materials following the end of the trade and transit impasse between nepal and india in may 1990.
whether this tag affects the font variant.
show zoom ratio.
cursor color.
encrypted, strong.
france can boast the lion 's share of high-priced bottles.
some democrats in congress are warning that a complicated new funding device for the two federal antitrust agencies could result in further cutbacks in a regulatory area already reduced sharply in recent years.
don't show the splash screen.
net income surged 31  to 7.63 billion yen from 5.82 billion yen.
expanded.
failed to load icon.
economic growth rate on the basis of an extensive evaluation of the alternative investment programmes and policies to be adopted by the plan, it is estimated that a 5.1 percent average annual growth rate will be achieved during the eighth plan period (table 1).
next.
you can drop dockable dialogs here.
unable to mount the volume. there is probably no media in the device.
last name.
missing.
new loans continue to slow ; they were $ 6.6 million in the quarter compared with $ 361.8 million a year ago.
montana.
the forthcoming maturity in november of a 10-year japanese government yen-denominated bond issue valued at about $ 16 billion has prompted speculation in the market that investors redeeming the bonds will diversify into dollar-denominated instruments according to mr. madison.
select desired voice.
the company is operating under chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy code giving it court protection from creditors ' lawsuits while it attempts to work out a plan to pay its debts.
select previous.
nonsquare pixels. image might look squashed.
leave fullscreen.
in the past, especially during the seventh plan period (1985-1990), it was estimated that there had occurred an unprecedented growth in agricultural production.
the above growth rate also appears to be an appropriate proposition on the basis of the capabilities of the economy and the uncertainties as to the mode of implementation of economic liberalization by the countries with which there are regional trade relations.
citizens in peninsula ohio upset over changes to a bridge negotiated a deal : the bottom half of the railing will be type f while the top half will have the old bridge 's floral pattern.
from paper.
mouse wheel.
there had been no marked changes in the economic structure until the fall of the panchayat regime.
while allocating resources in order to achieve regional balance, due attention has been paid to the necessity of creating physical infrastructure in these less developed regions.
a drop below that 3  benchmark  has always been a strong warning sign that stocks are fully valued  says mr. boesel of t. rowe price.
indentation of the first line.
by modification date.
for the aforementioned purpose, plans are underway to review the license system and all other existing policies and regulations with a view to increasing the involvement of private sector and nongovernmental organizations in the economic development of the country.
logo background color.
mariehamn.
voices.
import data and settings from older programs.
child x displacement.
at the prices we were charged there should have been some return for the dollar.
sandspit.
new tab.
style scheme name.
close print preview.
windom.
hostport on which the sound server to use is running.
totem preferences.
the ftc budget request of $ 70 million about $ 34 million of which would go for antitrust enforcement would also be cut by $ 15 million.
guerrilla leaders said pretoria was attempting to sabotage next week 's elections in namibia.
zoom to 11.
no gradients in document.
disabled.
târgumureş.
the mnemonic accelerator key for this label.
pronunciation.
selawik.
right arrow.
the american stock exchange market value index gained 1.56 to 372.14.
render.
he said authors of scoring high  scrupulously avoid  replicating exact questions but he does n't deny that some items are similar.
though this was a short term expedient to make up current account deficit amount, this was not a reliable and sound was out in the long run, as it was certain that the economy itseif will have to face serious consequences in the future due to the burden of the foreign debt loan.
generate a huge variety of abstract patterns.
mr. watson says mrs. yeargin never complained to school officials that the standardized test was unfair.
africa/lusaka.
many wild animal and small insects find shelter under the protecting branches of forest trees.
they operate ships and banks.
blender file.
authorization denied.
view target.
tex font.
high pass filter.
the general process has been to exploit these resources by importing foreign expertise and equipment.
add new signature.
fli animation.
reverting the document ….
scale selection to match the size of the copied object.
the physical infrastructure in health sector in being gradually developed and a big investment has also been made in the production of health manpower.
songs.
isi video.
sort.
aspect ratio with which to draw insertion cursor.
buffering.
its new products and trading techniques have been highly profitable.
the user has not created a public profile.
invalid mine count please enter a positive integer.
(b) energy development energy plays an important role in the economy, in respect of both domestic and exports sectors of the economy.
in transforming certain date related to financial position to constant prices, the use of the urban consumer price indices rather than that of implicit deflators of gdp in more practical.
pacific/wallis.
hue variations.
separator, paragraph.
new element node.
you can't give it up that easily  he says.
cannot operate on layers with masks.
no packages are broken.
query the state of the screensaver.
shift amount.
now rounded rectangle corners are scaled when rectangles are scaled.
when on, angles are displayed with 0 at north, 0 to 360 range, positive clockwise otherwise with 0 at east, 180 to 180 range, positive counterclockwise.
line down.
one tends to have less friends as one grows older and wiser.
black circle.
the condition's color.
in her wake she left the bitterness and anger of a principal who was her friend and now calls her a betrayer ; of colleagues who say she brought them shame ; of students and parents who defended her and insist she was treated harshly ; and of school-district officials stunned that despite the bald-faced nature of her actions she became something of a local martyr.
mr. spiegel 's fans say columbia 's southern california branches are highly salable and the thrift has $ 458 million of shareholders equity underlying its assets.
horizontally aligned diode.
it certainly leaves other media far behind in making such an appeal.
lecce.
/help/online help.
cursor down.
offline.
the evidence indicates that program trading did n't in fact cause the market 's sharp fall on oct. 13 though it may have exacerbated it.
in a well-known detective-story involving church bells english novelist dorothy l. sayers described ringing as a  passion -lcb- that -rcb- finds its satisfaction in mathematical completeness and mechanical perfection.
korean.
this happens when you log in to a computer the first time. the identity sent by the remote computer isif you want to be absolutely sure it is safe to continue, contact the system administrator.
flip vertical.
start date is wrong.
cannot encrypt outgoing message no encryption certificate set for this account.
prevent the user from saving files to disk. for example, this would disable access to all applications' "save as" dialogs.
you may come by the agency to read but not copy either manually or by photocopying  a voice official explained when i asked.
gradient map.
out of the total amount of water 97% is in oceans and seas.
user's manual.
priority.
morgan stanley last week joined a growing list of u.s. securities firms that have stopped doing index arbitrage for their own accounts.
mrs. hills said many of the 25 countries that she placed under varying degrees of scrutiny have made  genuine progress  on this touchy issue.
these enterprises suffered as a result of over staffing, political intervention, inefficiency and the lack of accountability.
the survey found that nearly half of hong kong consumers espouse what it identified as materialistic values compared with about one-third in japan and the u.s.
the bonus depended on her ability to produce higher student-test scores.
failed to set mode on '.
unmatched  in sorting policy description.
map to cylinder.
select address book.
edit fill.
telugu.
enter new password.
no batch interpreter specified, using the default.
email 1.
opacity.
fill left to right.
multiple locations set.
can't decode widecharacter string after.
duplicate.
starmath document.
tulsa.
couldn't change to.
punctuation, close.
octel.
sales in stores open more than one year rose 3  to $ 29.3 million from $ 28.4 million.
version string is empty.
found in configuration database is not a valid value for mouse button modifier.
weather snow.
flow.
whether to update login records when launching terminal command.
both deryck c. maughan who heads salomon in tokyo and john s. wadsworth who heads morgan stanley there ascribe a good part of their firms ' success in tokyo to their ability to offer sophisticated futures-related investment strategies to big institutional clients.
/sort objects/default/by name.
without any resource mobilisation for physical and institutional development, production targets, unthinkable in a historical perspective, were set for the fulfillment of the needs.
has formula.
enter new text.
unable to read license file.
important.
foreground color name.
mrs. yeargin was fired and prosecuted under an unusual south carolina law that makes it a crime to breach test security.
style override used with wildcard context reference in language in ref.
billings were n't disclosed for the small account which had been serviced at young & rubicam new york.
during this period, the average annual growth in gdp was 3.4 precent whereas the growth in per capita income was a mere 0.8 percent.
mark, spacing combining.
received.
ignore the bottom layer even if visible.
read.
the usia said that on reflection anyone could view the voa materials not just the reporters scholars researchers and congressmen who are mentioned in the statute.
vietnamese.
compose.
effect channel.
components for pneumatic and hydraulic circuits.
enabling failed.
all upper case.
although started in 1965 wedtech did n't really get rolling until 1975 when mr. neuberger discovered the federal government 's section 8 a minority business program.
the position in which the current value is displayed.
color scheme used in the kate text editor.
sample density.
couldn't losslessly save transparency, saving opacity instead.
the nine of spades.
indeed net cash income is likely to fall this year as farm expenses rise and government payments to farmers decline.
ual 's announcement came after the market closed yesterday.
alpha to logo.
must specify key schema name as the only argument.
countries like nepal hardly pay attention to sustainable development because they are not in an economically strong position to do so.
that 's why columbia just wrote off $ 130 million of its junk and reserved $ 227 million for future junk losses.
yesterday 's share turnover was well below the year 's daily average of 133.8 million.
a reading below 50  generally indicates a slowing in the industrial sector of the economy while a reading above 50  points to expansion.
error trying to open temporary file for parasite loading.
button relief.
natural color.
atlantic/azores.
whether to silence terminal bell.
save.
light drizzle.
it was realized that a plan formulated without detailed knowledge of actual conditions and the development potential of the several was of limited usefulness.
clickdrag to move this point.
varkaus.
the rural development infrastructure will provide employment opportunities to the growing labour force of the rural sector.
im preedit style.
tile saturation.
new folder.
maximum possible x value.
however, owing to the constraints in the supply of necessary commodities and insufficient and incompatible initiatives, tourism has so far been a seasonal phenomenon and has not been able to make the desired headway.
rudolph agnew 55 years old and former chairman of consolidated gold fields plc was named a nonexecutive director of this british industrial conglomerate.
failed to process build dependencies.
spike points.
delete this folder, without moving to the trash.
he has promised stiffer fines though the size of penalties sought by osha have been rising in recent years even before he took office this year.
says kathryn mcauley an analyst at first manhattan co. :  this is the greatest acquisition challenge he has faced.
changes were made in financial rules to minimize control and intervention and expedite plan implementation.
the selection rectangle.
delete the podcast feed and downloaded files?
unallocated.
in view of the trade composition of the country, the industrial goods have, in comparison with food products and raw materials, started gaining dominant share in the countryâ€™s export.
this string will be used to identify a unit in gimp's configuration files.
narsarsuaq.
a white house spokesman said last week that the president is considering declaring that the constitution implicitly gives him the authority for a line-item veto to provoke a test case.
draw the toggle button as a radio button.
line  line too long.
he appeared to be gasping for breath.
adds support to rhythmbox for playing and purchasing from the magnatune online music store.
stuart.
view the scores.
clear flag.
click to smudge the line.
the xpad.
raise the current layer.
fullscreen.
authorization denied message.
never display this message again.
argentina aspires to reach a reduction of 50  in the value of its external debt  mr. rapanelli said through his spokesman miguel alurralde.
normal title font.
require password.
menubar detachable.
change the tile hue by this percentage for each row.
key operation on directory.
whether background color is set.
are you sure you want to delete this meeting?
select all.
inline math mode.
macro call.
documents/presentation.
whether selected font size is shown in the label.
unlocks a pgp key.
he also is a consensus manager insiders say.
rsa encrypt only.
file descriptor.
the seven of hearts.
shear angle.
internal error good signature, but could not determine key fingerprint?!
program name as used by the window manager.
accept.
could not open for reading.
destination channel.
the heated talk stirred up by recent japanese investments in the u.s. is focusing attention on the differences in investment climate even though it 's only one of many subjects to be covered in the bilateral talks known as the structural impediments initiative.
cannot create cms recipient information.
the national association of manufacturers settled on the hoosier capital of indianapolis for its fall board meeting.
play a specified uri, importing it if necessary.
no more form fields.
sv4 cpio archive.
no paths found in.
he said that even though virtually all corn seeds currently planted are hybrids the genetic approach will obviate the need for mechanical emasculation of anthers which costs u.s. seed producers about $ 70 million annually.
channels.
failed to write byte to pipe file descriptor so client program may hang.
pick.
analysts were disappointed that the enthusiasm investors showed for stocks in the wake of georgia-pacific 's $ 3.18 billion bid for great northern nekoosa evaporated so quickly.
custom servers.
the vertical alignment, from 0 top to 1 bottom.
the usia publicly and officially stated in the litigation that all persons are allowed access to the materials notwithstanding the statutory designations because the usia has determined that it will not check the credentials of any person appearing and requesting to see the materials  mr. mccormick noted.
sales fell 20  to # 722 million.
the company said its people 's savings bank unit does n't have a  large exposure to construction and commercial loans that have caused the loan-loss problems in many of the banks.
invalid contact.
use alpha.
/conversation/insert image.
however, this does not grant them the happiness or the peace of mind.
frame style already has a button for function state.
threshold for the red eye color to remove.
track number.
moreover there have been no orders for the cray-3 so far though the company says it is talking with several prospects.
contrast cycles.
asia/kamchatka.
earlier this year shaw publishing inc. charlotte acquired 30  of american city and has an agreement to acquire a further 25  from e.w. scripps co. next year.
switch to normal display mode.
foreground color.
whether the arrow keys move through the list of items.
important.
at work, fierce competition, deadlines and meetings await the city dweller.
failed to load image  reason not known, probably a corrupt image file.
moreover junk professionals think columbia 's huge third-quarter markdown of its junk portfolio to $ 4.4 billion was n't enough meaning another markdown could be coming.
modified diagrams exist. are you sure you want to quit dia without saving them?
burgas.
four suits.
insert spaces instead of tabs.
interleukin-3 may help in treating blood cell deficiencies associated with cancer treatment bone marrow transplants and other blood-cell disorders genetics institute said.
text only.
default image.
themes.
procedure returned an invalid id for argumentmost likely a plugin is trying to work on a layer that doesn't exist any longer.
hyperlinked identifier.
no matching group file entry in.
open the font selection dialog.
position.
thus, according to an estimate, by the end of f.y. 1991/92, 6,699,000 people (39 percent) in the rural sector and 1,172,000 people in the urban areas (66 percent), a total of 7,871,000 people would have has access to drinking water facilities.
fill by.
library location.
and indeed the lawsuit was dismissed.
sender contains.
file attributes.
pixels below lines.
in order to meet the urban demand for milk, eggs, fish, meat, fruits and vegetables, priority will be given to intensive productions programmes in areas adjacent to the cities and along road corridors to urban areas.
select an object to clone.
color shading type.
requested action not taken mailbox unavailable.
gtk theme.
failed to satisfy dependency for  installed package is too new.
no subsector under the industrial sector was able to attract either domestic or foreign investors.
file vanished or error reading.
smallest possible value for the "position" property.
registration successful.
redo.
move.
concerned about shrinking landfills and the safety of chemicals used in super-absorbent disposables parents are returning to the cloth diaper.
in the past, the plans did not pay required attention to these aspects, nor was an appropriate planning methodology used, the economic growth rate was determined in the initial stage of planning based on external variables.
there were concerns early in the day that wall street 's sharp gains on tuesday were overdone and due for a reversal.
africa/kampala.
' is an invalid character in key/directory names.
sets the manner in which transparency is displayed in images.
sans 12.
bank of new england corp. said it has held talks with potential merger partners outside new england although it added that nothing is imminent and it has n't received any formal offers.
toolbar.
open link.
pt.
therefore, in order to expand the export trade, due attention must be paid to the identification of new exportable products and the amelioration of quality standards of the export items.
click to delete this anchor.
show or hide the color palette.
magenta.
change the intensity of the red channel.
eagle wing.
apply to all instances.
regular polygon number of sides.
this signature has been changed, but has not been saved.
neither company would disclose the program 's cost.
at the same time export demand for u.s. wheat corn and other commodities strengthened said keith collins a department analyst.
bahrain.
ethiopic.
cannot allocate colormap entries.
active filters.
group with objects.
error executing filter search.
geographic information.
gimp could not initialize the graphical user interface. make sure a proper setup for your display environment exists.
accessible table row description.
rename file.
at present, owing to the execessive liquidity in the economy, while the rate of consumption in increasing, the rate of savings in on the decline.
notodden.
dia shape file.
x alignment of the child.
bach 's  air  followed.
bastia.
decline.
hebrew visual.
palette map.
on one side of this power struggle stand the forces in ascendency on wall street the new guard consisting of high-tech computer wizards at the major brokerage firms their pension fund clients with immense pools of money and the traders at the fast-growing chicago futures exchanges.
there is considerable variation in the simplicity of definition of urban area.
object activation framework error.
william a. wise 44 years old president of the el paso natural gas co. unit of this energy and natural-resources concern was named to the additional post of chief executive officer succeeding travis h. petty 61 who continues as a vice chairman of the parent.
it has no events.
first he said domestic interest rates are likely to stay at higher levels as increased anticipation of inflation followed rising consumer prices reported last week.
all files.
b) the fiscal year 1961/62 remained a year without a plan.
cannot rename folder  no such folder.
similarly highway engineers agreed to keep the old railings on the key bridge in washington d.c. as long as they could install a crash barrier between the sidewalk and the road.
file transfer cancelled.
rolls-royce motor cars inc. said it expects its u.s. sales to remain steady at about 1,200 cars in 1990.
directory not empty.
error compiling regular expression.
middle east.
new meeting.
for some time banks have been aiming packages at the elderly the demographic segment with the highest savings.
san luis obispo.
printer.
the broader question is where the senate stands on the issue.
modify account.
error detected, changes ignored.
1st to 10th.
light blue.
asia/seoul.
enable popup notifications for new messages.
some of these deprivations can be partially overcome.
create a rule to filter messages from this sender.
did not understand arrow for element.
use check boxes for first column.
the logger has no read function.
show or hide the tool controls bar.
however, these programmes were confined to mere slogans due to the lack of political commitment.
revert.
the company added that it has filed patent applications  on a large number of different bmp proteins  and the patent on bmp-1 is the first it has received.
modify green channel.
as far as the railway transport is concerned, the progress was absolutely nil.
flag status.
eight off.
syncing folders.
eraser tool erase to background or transparency using a brush.
failed to close file '.
europe/uzhgorod.
monitors.
while, this ratio was about 1 percent in 1974/75, it increased to 8.5 percent in 1989/90.
that process of sorting out specifics is likely to take time the japanese say no matter how badly the u.s. wants quick results.
version will be installed.
at greenville high school meanwhile some students especially on the cheerleading squad were crushed.
the password for is unchanged.
line break.
merrill lynch ready assets trust : 8.63.
channel topic.
connect strokes.
getting message.
path cannot be raised higher.
the seven of spades.
it 's hard to explain to a 17-year-old why someone they like had to go  says mrs. ward.
get list archive.
read only.
africa/bangui.
there is something inherently suspect about congress 's prohibiting the executive from even studying whether public funds are being wasted in some favored program or other.
unknown authentication state.
most dangers to aircraft however are man-made.
rearrange colormap.
restore previous cursor position.
end time.
punched card.
network buffering threshold.
as a result of the low growth rate in per capita income, nepal happened to stand low even among the poorest nations of the world.
the bids he added were  contrary to common sense.
magick image format.
zoom in.
offset angle.
terms weren't disclosed.
connection cancelled.
action to perform when this transition is taken.
clear values.
the major rivers in nepal are mechi, koshi, bagmati, narayani, gandaki, karnali and mahakali.
tray column, detailed.
not really.
month calendar.
failed.
because of the dynamic nature of the asian standard, the term was eventually deleted from the slogan.
wrap.
random by time since last play.
height of paper.
arrow head of type has too small dimensions, removing.
disable.
frame geometry does not specify size of buttons.
workgroup fibre channel intelligent switch.
no such file '.
9.78  standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875  2  rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages.
local file.
retinex.
similarly, local bodies will be empowered to approve tenders for the supply of construction materials and the construction services for local development projects.
set the root node from the model.
the majority of the people are poor and it is difficult for them to meet their basic needs.
invalid room handle.
participation means that people are closely involved in the economic, social and cultural and political processes that affect their lives.
the sectoral incremental capital output rations have been estimated on the basis of internal processes of the model.
miter limit.
authorities.
powell river.
environment map.
selected.
see.
execute external commands and shell scripts.
braille.
cursor hotspot outside image.
in the third quarter georgia gulf earned $ 46.1 million or $ 1.85 a share down from $ 53 million or $ 1.85 a share on fewer shares outstanding.
calculating upgrade.
system policy prevents querying proxy settings.
refused by client.
it said the man whom it did not name had been found to have the disease after hospital tests.
lentjes ' product mix of specialized boilers and pipes provides a good fit with its own lurgi g.m.b.h. plant engineering unit the company said.
prepend string into window title.
wisconsin.
reduce.
error writing output file.
the increased demand in the labour force during the eighth plan period is expected to reach over 1.4 million jobs.
continue.
whitefield.
lower selection one step.
processes.
speaks the current flat review object.
intelliswitch stack.
takuma yamamoto president of fujitsu ltd. believes  the  money worship ' among young people  caused the problem.
select a group to ungroup.
scale value by.
in october 6.7  of respondents said they will buy a car easing from september when 8.1  anticipated a purchase.
along the way he meets a solicitous christian chauffeur who offers the hero god 's phone number ; and the sheep man a sweet roughhewn figure who wears what else a sheepskin.
while looking at the road-population ratio, every kilometer of road had served a population averaging 7857  people in 1960, upon the reduction of this ration on 1989/90, every kilometer served a population of 2441.
skip all.
backslash.
drop targets.
upgrade.
unable to add to deny list.
precious metals : futures prices eased as increased stability and strength came into the securities markets.
the paper accused him of being a leading proponent of  peaceful evolution  a catch phrase to describe what china believes is the policy of western countries to seduce socialist nations into the capitalist sphere.
recognizing these limitations, second plan sectoral targets were fixed in terms of nepal’s ability to finance and imp lement the development programme.
guide  grid snapping.
mark.
browse and rotate images.
public key babbleprint.
average under brush.
indexed palette type.
music management and playback software for gnome.
move gradients in fill or stroke along with the objects.
choose a high compression level for small file size.
sharp eight point star.
starimpress presentation.
also observed are the costs per hectare of projects constructed with the participate on of farmers to be ranging from re. 8,000 to rs 25,000.
patterns.
in fy 1989/90, this corporation had 24 aeroplanes and it operated its services internally is 36 places and externally in 10 cities.
heritage media corp. new york said it offered to buy the shares of pop radio corp. it does n't already own in a stock swap.
allowing the installation of version.
you feel you want one more one more at-bat one more hit one more game.
federal national mortgage association fannie mae : posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days priced at par 9.75  standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.70  6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages.
hence, the pace of development of the industrial sector was slow in the past.
create one or more paths from a bitmap by tracing it.
once we do they will receive very serious evaluation  the spokesman said.
tagbanwa.
stroke density.
sioux falls.
yale is one of the few medical institutions conducting privately funded research on fetal-tissue transplants.
waukegan.
file send failed.
go to next page.
invisible set.
couldn't access.
sec chairman richard breeden has said he would be willing to consider circuit breakers that have preset trigger points but he does n't want discretionary power to stop programs.
groups have accused him of advocating policies that narrowed rights of older workers and of ignoring discrimination by large companies.
thermal action.
the best machines are used for the production of arms and ammunition.
the '/' name can only be a directory, not a key.
the following packages will be downgraded.
poitiers.
please enter the appropriate information about the chat you would like to join.
guernsey.
after the delay, drag your mouse to select the region for the screenshot.
moody 's said those returns compare with a 3.8  total return for longer-term treasury notes and bonds.
ouargla.
on a pretax basis itel's third-quarter earnings of 30 cents a share were actually 7.14  higher than the average of estimates.
match case.
while crossing one must look to the right and left for moving vehicles and then cross.
can't change root directory to.
traditional stock managers like to charge 50 cents to 75 cents for every $ 100 they manage for big institutional investors and higher fees for smaller investors.
mark the selected messages as junk.
america/indiana/indianapolis.
thus, the debt obligations increased from 2.0 percent in 1972/73 to 42.9 percent of gross domestic product in 1989/90.1 due to the expansionary fiscal policies adopted during this period, the gross expenditure recorded and average annual growth rate of approximately 17 percent from fiscal years 1964/65 to 1989/90.
new layer created.
fishing wire makes bad dental floss.
unmaximize.
language specification directories.
audio cd.
spec macro.
move to workspace right.
action not available.
kauhava.
waited for but it wasn't there.
stewart & stevenson makes equipment powered with diesel and gas turbines.
sound method.
hydraulic.
if an elementary machinery lick water million, diesel engine and bio-gas plants could be developed in the rural areas, it will contribute immensely to the development of food processing industries and cottage industries.
get a hint for your next move.
whether the spin button should update always, or only when the value is legal.
therefore, the per capita income has increased marginally and estimated to have reached rs 1754.
gnu image manipulation program.
override for width request of the widget, or 1 if natural request should be used.
evolution calendar item.
/conversation/get info.
make the window not always on top.
fujitsu ltd. 's top executive took the unusual step of publicly apologizing for his company 's making bids of just one yen for several local government projects while computer rival nec corp. made a written apology for indulging in the same practice.
treize.
insert link.
revenue surplus:during the period between 1972/73 and 1989/90 the revenue increased at the rate of 17.3 percent at current prices and 6.9 percent at constant prices.
fire action.
the type of the window.
this is where bell 's patents went.
can't write to file '.
octagons  squares.
delete currently selected fractal.
pop up a file selector to choose a file.
copy the active curve to the other border.
start event  rule.
whether to wrap the license text.
before 1951, some development activities were undertaken but their scope was very limited.
pressure relief valve.
programs for internet access such as web and email.
turkish.
decrease the playback volume.
gross domestic product owing to the low growth rate in gross domestic product in comparison with the high growth rate in population, the percapita income recorded only a marginal increase during the period 1964/65 to 1989/90.
it is certainly not an easy task to accelerate the pace of development in a distorted economic, social and administrative milieu created by the panchayat regime during the last thirty years.
edge darken.
2.3.
the language of the appropriations rider implies that any nomination to any position of a rejected nominee will result in the president being denied funding to pay that person 's salary.
duplicate contact detected.
an archive manager for gnome.
i hardly miss a news item of human interest.
import mail from pine.
work week view.
advanced options.
no files found.
key type options.
initialize from selection.
install lubuntu.
individuals and corporations as well as dealers trading for their own account actively bought tuesday.
others may not see this signature.
username.
free markets free minds and free elections have an appeal that seems to get muddled only when delivered through u.n. organizations which of course are made up largely of governments that fear these principles at home.
compose new message.
other options.
the server refused the connection and said.
your oct. 6 editorial  the ill homeless  referred to research by us and six of our colleagues that was reported in the sept. 8 issue of the journal of the american medical association.
bagotville.
preview document printout.
guineabissau.
further liberalization, simplification and clarification of government policies, and.
the finnish government and major creditors of bankrupt shipyard waertsilae marine industries oy agreed in principle to form a new company to complete most of the troubled shipyard 's backlog of 15 ships.
no file transfer session active.
file is not a valid save file.
some criminal lawyers speculated that the irs was sending the letters to test the issue.
instead they are trying to build customer loyalty by bundling their services into packages and targeting them to small segments of the population.
go to next bookmark location.
set language.
mr. dinkins did fail to file his income taxes for four years but he insists he voluntarily admitted the  oversight  when he was being considered for a city job.
no network connection.
the tension was evident on wednesday evening during mr. nixon 's final banquet toast normally an opportunity for reciting platitudes about eternal friendship.
letterlike symbols.
and of course there 's that word  dissemination.
to make them directly comparable each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
that sound (or noise) too pollutes the environment may look funny to many.
a reservoir is also a great attraction to water-loving birds and often becomes an interesting staging-post for migrations.
one analyst arthur stevenson of prudential-bache securities new york estimated that 65  or more of brazil 's newly made automobiles run on alcohol and ca n't use gasoline.
he admits though it is n't one of campbell soup 's better products in terms of recyclability.
nepal with rich ancient cultures set against the most dramatic scenery in the world is a land of discovery and unique experience.
defaultmm.
williams lake.
create and modify an archive.
the scientists said they made the advance with yttrium-containing superconductors cooled to liquid-nitrogen temperature or minus 321 degrees fahrenheit.
you can only specify a package archive with an 'install' command.
cranwell.
georgian.
combining diacritical marks for symbols.
dick lobo the general manager of wtvj the nbc-owned station in miami for example says the show has  been a major disappointment to us.
automatic backups of unsaved documents were done to the following locations.
further he said the company does n't have the capital needed to build the business over the next year or two.
amarillo.
borderonly window.
play.
america/hermosillo.
sandpoint.
connect to server.
removable volume.
pottstown.
al hoceima.
markup.
swift current.
although considerable success was achieved in country wise diversification of trade for bringing about changes in its traditional situation, no significant achievement was made in achieving trade balance by increasing the volume of export through product-wise diversification.
while the new proposal might appeal to the dirtiest utilities it might not win the support of utilities many in the west that already have added expensive cleanup equipment or burn cleaner-burning fuels.
the requirement is expected to be met even through the production of the factory of the nepalese army.
voice, lossy.
undo history.
no moves are possible. undo or start again.
and as a leading investment and merchant banking firm the fact that we are no longer subject to the uncertainties and vicissitudes of the retail business is a major plus in our view.
as regards the borrowings of government sector, there occurred and annual growth of 32.2 percent from 1964/65 to 1989/90.
color deficiency type.
go to the dvd menu.
indexed alpha.
thirdly, as the eighth plan lays special emphasis on rural development, there will be a considerable increase in peopleâ€™s participation and the contribution of labour.
the owner of this key is authorized to connect to this computer.
relay vertical.
the second patent describes bone morphogenetic protein-1 a substance that can induce formation of new cartilage.
color of the page border.
configuration file ' was not found.
eaton corp. said it sold its pacific sierra research corp. unit to a company formed by employees of that unit.
calendar publishing.
pacific/pagopago.
supported formats.
cellular phone.
no database available to save your configuration.
in august the commission ruled that between $ 190 million and $ 195 million of the plant 's construction cost was unreasonable and should be refunded plus interest.
south africa accused armed namibian nationalist guerrillas of crossing from bases in neighboring angola violating u.n.-supervised peace plans for the territory 's independence from pretoria.
asia/oral.
expected string, got.
page up.
calendar view for one or more days.
cancel all pending installations, removals, holds, and upgrades.
the entire requirement of these products will have to be met through import.
invalid sorting policy type.
display error dialog.
couldn't change expiry date.
go to a specific line.
revelstoke.
vertical spacing of grid lines.
sales however were little changed at 2.46 billion guilders compared with 2.42 billion guilders.
left edge.
always.
whether to expand the child's tab or not.
but the exact amount of reliance 's current holding has n't been formally disclosed.
the charge partly reflects a switch from older five-inch to more-efficient six-inch silicon wafers with which to fabricate chips.
no gradients in selection.
other fonts.
calendar.
desktop font.
edmonton.
spending on private nonresidential construction was off 2.6  to an annual rate of $ 99.1 billion with no sector showing strength.
inset/outset by.
exeter.
modify curves.
select palette file.
elements of design.
components for circuit diagrams.
is continuous.
gorgan.
quakertown.
you send.
chesapeake.
close preview.
she did n't elaborate although earlier u.s. trade reports have complained of videocassette piracy in malaysia and disregard for u.s. pharmaceutical patents in turkey.
the five of clubs.
rally 's inc. said it has redeemed its rights outstanding issued monday in its shareholder rights plan.
analysing video files.
ends with.
select the number of times to replicate the selection.
intermediate event.
use a 'statusline' download indicator for all downloads.
copy here.
archive.
there is no asbestos in our products now.
this filter takes its configuration from the color management section in the preferences dialog.
use custom font.
father does the same in another way.
in cat sections where students ' knowledge of two-letter consonant sounds is tested the authors noted that scoring high concentrated on the same sounds that the test does to the exclusion of other sounds that fifth graders should know.
0 for the system info, 1 for the processes list, 2 for the resources and 3 for the disks list.
show status bar.
adjust brightness and contrast.
recording a gradual increase, the shared of finished products increased to 82.9 percent of the total export in fy 1989/90.
opening failed.
founder key babbleprint.
the economic condition of some segments of population deteriorated even further.
test to see that all signals are working properly.
evolution import assistant.
display list dialog.
it should have a full time librarian.
miscellaneous symbols and arrows.
furthermore, a teacher's job is tedious and monotonous.
revert.
intersection color.
use the foreground color.
align top edge of target.
we live on the most beautiful planet.
deselect all.
highlights.
go to today.
color picker.
vegreville.
billings.
halifax.
send options.
after the first set of meetings two months ago some u.s. officials complained that japan had n't come up with specific changes it was prepared to make.
bengali.
andrews.
ideographic description characters.
we are shipping the most corn in that short of time period to one customer on record  said william dunton a u.s. agriculture department transportation expert.
but the flow of investment could not be channeled to industries with long term benefits due to the lack of proper implementation mechanism, procedural constraints and administrative delay.
there was a great increase in the foreign debt in the years past.
contact list members.
skip taskbar.
wireless connectivity.
kärdla.
reset tool order and visibility.
religion plays an important role in the lives of majority of human beings.
rename.
sets the monitor's horizontal resolution, in dots per inch. if set to 0, forces the x server to be queried for both horizontal and vertical resolution information.
a preview of the image currently specified.
similarly, there took place only a slow growth in products directly associated with the needs of the society such as cement, sugar, cotton merchandise, matches, there occurred a considerable growth in consumable products like liquor, beer, synthetic cloth, soap, shoe and biscuit.
r.p. scherer corp. said it completed the $ 10.2 million sale of its southern optical subsidiary to a group led by the unit 's president thomas r. sloan and other managers.
pets have become a common sight in many households.
no schema stored at.
time divisions.
whether the pixmap entry should have a preview.
simplify selected paths remove extra nodes.
must specify a schema name followed by the key name to apply it to.
the fact that efficient, autonomous local bodies are the cornerstone of a democratic system and can, uphold the responsibility of local development through peopleâ€™s participation was ignored.
palette type.
flag the currently selected package and its configuration files for removal.
minimum days between emptying the trash on exit.
value type is only relevant when setting a value.
texaco rose 3/4 to 53 3/8 as 4.4 million shares changed hands.
select address book for pidgin buddy list.
torrington.
share.
error opening file.
execute the trace.
volume.
available controllers.
show arrow.
thus, the doctorpartient ration and the hospital bed population ration reached 115, 800 and 13,967 respectively.
exponent.
saratoga.
it ended the day up 80 yen 56 cents to 1,880 yen $ 13.15.
default color of terminal background.
hide addresses when sending mail to this list.
the purchase price includes two ancillary companies.
the government established a citizenâ€™s investment fund, introduced wealth tax and made efforts to redue the budgetary deficit.
collapse.
the $ 35.7 million net loss equals 86 cents a share.
remove from the list of active filters.
gastonia.
hungarian.
edit colormap entry.
invalid time value.
but it was neither deep nor lasting : light entertainment that was no substitute for an evening of brahms.
extract the selected archive.
no command exec to launch.
i ca n't believe they -lrb- gm -rrb- will let ford have a free run  said stephen reitman a european auto industry analyst at ubs-phillips & drew.
click or clickdrag to create a new anchor.
puerto rico.
marubeni advanced 11 to 890.
zoom 21.
a full four-color page in newsweek will cost $ 100,980.
failed to remove lock directory '.
fukue.
shearson is 62%-owned by american express co.
truetype.
honolulu.
list of people documenting the program.
swap one color with another.
economic situation.
the chicago company 's beverage carrier meant to replace cardboard trays at concession stands and fast-food outlets resembles the plastic loops used on six-packs of beer only the loops hang from a web of strings.
background color.
window size change.
load fractal parameters.
close tab.
a lorillard spokewoman said  this is an old story.
rockwell international corp. reported flat operating earnings for the fourth quarter ended sept. 30.
u.s. army mobile subscriber equipment components.
expiration date.
trading is expected to remain subdued as the market awaits tomorrow 's release of the jobs data with the hope that it will point toward a decline in interest rates.
rectangles.
there are no more moves.
by name.
create and set up.
restart game.
new import.
scripts.
color picker tool set colors from image pixels.
pv.
filename.
unreadable secure shell key.
bad format.
and several new funds that are n't even fully invested yet have jumped to trade at big premiums.
cannot add yourself.
switch to tab 5.
server closed the connection.
disconnected.
if the disparity in urban and rural income is not reduced, this trend my gain greater momentum.
page total.
bookmarks.
extract archives to the specified folder and quit the program.
attendee status updated.
several of the festivals of nepal last from one to several days.
edit gnome audio profiles.
could not listen on the socket.
could not start the file transfer.
the machine name to proxy socks through.
either way you are in for an experience for a lifetime.
the nontransparent economic policies and regulations have given rise to rent seeking behaviour causing a considerable weakening of the financial administration.
cap style.
call money : 9 3/4  to 10.
broken packages.
i was n't ever actively engaged in any securities activities  said mr. cutrer.
the plan has made additional efforts to increase the productivity of the productivity of the labour force and to make the financial investment more productive.
the excision of unconstitutional conditions in an appropriations bill would be a power of far more limited applicability.
save state.
pause the game.
during the period of three decades, the development of industry remained at the rudimentary stage and could not gain momentum.
removed all 's modes.
center.
the natural causes are weathering, water, ice, wind and change of temperature.
nautilus link.
visibility.
restore default fonts.
select and transform objects.
mountaineering and other types of adventure tourism and ecotourism are important attractions for visitors.
but sony ultimately took a lesson from the american management books and fired mr. katzenstein after he committed the social crime of making an appointment to see the venerable akio morita founder of sony.
in seoul officials began visiting about 26,000 cigarette stalls to remove illegal posters and signboards advertising imported cigarettes.
the parent folder is not allowed to contain subfolders.
not owned by not removing.
computer shapes by cisco.
pick a color.
file format is unknown or unsupported.
western.
the conference approved at least $ 55 million in direct cash and development assistance as well and though no decision was made both sides are committed to adding more than $ 200 million in economic support funds and environmental initiatives sought by the bush administration.
the major reason behind the 15.2 percent growth was the increase in overall index by 20.8 percent in 1991/92.
icon set to display.
random shared.
cordova.
whether to show categories field in the event/meeting editor.
social services 4.1.
saintyan.
this server does not support this type of authentication and may not support authentication at all.
but is installed and it is kept back.
plugin.
find remote keys.
no sub-sector under the industrial sector was able to attract either domestic or foreign investors.
person leaves chat.
importing key.
blend does not operate on indexed layers.
copy contact to.
file server.
in the tower five men and women pull rhythmically on ropes attached to the same five bells that first sounded here in 1614.
from the table, it clearly appears that ins spite of high priority accorded to private sector investment, the private sectorâ€™s savings in likely to exceed its investment amount.
postscript level 2.
we 're gaining 1,200 new customers each week  says jack mogavero of general health care corp. piscataway n.j.
submit query.
using shape tools to create and edit shapes.
spiral preferences.
lahaina.
gradient folders.
hudson general which provides maintenance fueling and other services to airlines and airports reported a loss for its most recent fiscal year and last month omitted the semiannual dividend on its common shares.
resynchronizing with server.
convert edge.
not expected.
arrow shadow.
could not run command.
fixed equipment.
close all windows.
small wonder since he 's asking san francisco taxpayers to sink up to $ 100 million into the new stadium.
speak all.
active?
last output.
import a new palette.
camelot.
the port to access the server on.
they suffered from malnutrition chest diseases cardiovascular disorders skin problems infectious diseases and the aftereffects of assaults and rape.
for the first time the october survey polled members on imports.
invalid numeric argument.
but the reality of security jobs is often different from the dream.
determines which processes to show by default. 0 is all, 1 is user, and 2 is active.
enter delegate.
there is no script in the new version of the package  giving up.
visible when horizontal.
sericulture, bee keeping medicinal herb farming and similar significant but low-cost small -scale activities will be encouraged to increase the income of the farmers in the hills and the mountains.
specialized directiondependent edge detection.
the benefits of doing so are obvious.
alien map.
more and more corners of the globe are becoming free of tobacco smoke.
directions.
arguments.
never.
tv : price communications corp. completed the sale of four of its tv stations to ntg inc. for $ 120 million in cash and notes retaining a 10  equity stake in the new concern.
error writing to file.
enter the old passphrase for.
unable to create cache path.
ubon ratchathani.
one official newspaper legal daily even directly criticized mr. nixon who is normally referred to here as an  old friend.
logos.
failed to open '.
send.
galveston.
show deleted messages with a strikethrough in the messagelist.
when warren winiarski proprietor of stag 's leap wine cellars in napa valley announced a $ 75 price tag for his 1985 cask 23 cabernet this fall few wine shops and restaurants around the country balked.
they read mickey spillane and talk about groucho and harpo.
wall street 's big securities firms face the prospect of having their credit ratings lowered.
a title that may be displayed by the window manager when this menu is tornoff.
owner al brownstein originally planned to sell it for $ 60 a bottle but when a retailer in southern california asked  is that wholesale or retail ?  he re-thought the matter.
headers and footers.
arrow properties.
they are exposed to continuous bickering, quarrels and ultimately, misery.
select all objects in all visible and unlocked layers.
javascript source code.
unknown reason.
left shift.
the industrial average jumped more than 41 points tuesday as speculators rushed to buy shares of potential takeover targets.
grosseto.
after troubled heritage media proposed acquiring pop radio in a stock swap pop radio 's shares tumbled 4 to 14 3/4.
show version information and exit.
galeon.
adding contact to ldap server.
the version of is too old.
nevertheless both mr. guffey and mr. black say the slowdown so far is no cause for concern.
no compression.
no text is allowed inside element.
i think 0 the market had been expecting the fed to ease sooner and a little more than it has to date  said robert johnson vice president of global markets for bankers trust co.
calendar.
accessible table summary.
the item could not be renamed.
error writing mail temp file.
those who still want to do it  will just find some way to get around  any attempt to curb it.
don't show this message again.
cannot remove old files list.
xinjiang.
pause game.
an invalid drag type was used.
mosaic.
as there are severe limitations on expanding the cultivable land, this plan has accorded priority to agricultural intensification and diversification.
light direction.
with the shudders came the realization that some of wall street 's biggest players are struggling to maintain the stellar credit standing required to finance their activities profitably.
save in folder.
workstation.
but who is responsible for making kathmandu this way?
deselect all.
version.
redo the undone move.
suceava.
that was the law.
basic filter.
task information sent.
president bush should veto appropriations acts that contain these kinds of unconstitutional conditions on the president 's ability to discharge his duties and exercise his prerogatives.
the issue is further complicated by uncertainty over the future of the u.s. 's leases on military bases in the philippines and by a possible u.s. troop reduction in south korea.
scream tracker 3 audio.
your password will expire tomorrow.
whether the status bar should be visible.
protocol.
they were tentatively priced to yield from 6.20  in 1991 to 7.272  in foreign bond west german dealers said there was little interest in treasury bonds ahead of thursday 's new government bond issue.
estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted.
include remote tests.
view of the current folder.
he cannot do anything for anybody.
if you want support, you need to provide the saved details!
the event could not be deleted because permission was denied.
select all in all layers.
click the eyedropper, then click a color anywhere on your screen to select that color.
none don't publish keys.
mr. ross said he met with officials of the irs and the justice department which would bring any enforcement actions against taxpayers to discuss the issue last may.
label yalign.
could not create pipe.
orientation.
the competitive rates were generally offset by hefty fees on various services.
remote files only.
rectangle select.
pacific/niue.
until last week the irs rarely acted on the incomplete forms.
public key authentication.
specifies the font to use for a document's body when printing documents.
font folders.
the heavy reliance on forests for the total energy consumption of the country has led to a massive destruction of forests.
determining that may enable them to develop better ways to introduce the needed crystal-lattice patterns.
name of the gtk input method status style used by gtk.
select objects to remove clippath or mask from.
gif image.
but learning materials matched on 66.5 of 69 subskills.
the plant will produce control devices used in motor vehicles and household appliances.
not mounted.
new information systems also provide accessibility and connectivity.
the optimum utilization of regionally available means and resources will also enhance the national production.
gjoa haven.
background color.
option requires an argument.
connection failed.
hudson general corp. 's president and chief executive officer alan j. stearn resigned.
composite child.
caption.
manage snippets.
cannot fetch the public key.
no lyrics found.
enable braille support.
broken bar.
symbol.
get file.
whether the children should all be the same size.
nntp server returned error code.
scale 2.
's public files.
trust the authenticity of this certificate.
the name of the themed icon displayed on the item.
sensitivity.
horizontally aligned fuse.
many commissions were constituted and studies conducted on the issue of the decentralization of power.
paradoxically, they also spread when law and order sanctions are either tightened or relaxed.
some attachments are being downloaded. saving the appointment would result in the loss of these attachments.
all that changed when i had a paranormal experience one fateful sunday just a year ago.
offset layer mask.
columbia savings & loan nyse ; symbol : csv business : savings and loan year ended dec. 31 1988 : net income : $ 65 million ; or $ 1.49 a share third quarter sept. 30 1989 : net loss : $ 11.57 a share vs. net income : 37 cents a share average daily trading volume : 83,206 shares common shares outstanding : 19.6 million note : all per-share figures are fully diluted.
detach tab.
cincinnati.
has started typing to you.
composing images.
the investment choices offered by the pension fund currently are limited to a stock fund an annuity and a money-market fund.
pointer to remote data.
beveled pattern.
name lookup failed.
there was also a constant strong wind that threw the raindrops onto the closed windows causing a continual patter.
exit.
similarly, local bodies will be empowered to approve tenders for the supply of construction materials and the construction services for local development projects.
could not add application.
diverge.
all related.
scripts.
can't decode object.
untitled message.
a spokesman for the state however calls the idea  not effective or cost efficient.
expression.
only speak changed lines during find.
focus in toplevel.
install.
moderate drizzle.
minimum time between emptying the junk on exit, in days.
buddy icon.
limit search to the current layer.
large brush.
unable to unload ual and other airline shares takeover-stock speculators or risk arbitragers dumped every blue-chip stock they had.
select file type.
the expansion of the public sector and the uncontrolled inclusion of numerous projects during the panchayat regime have led to the continuity of an expenditure burden in the initial years of the eighth plan entailing a continued increase in government expenditure and negative savings.
high cost economy in view of the inaccessibility and the ruggedness of terrain it is not unusual for the production and delivery costs to be high.
the current maintainers of dia are.
profiles.
curve for border.
any field contains.
the irs warnings stem from a 1984 law that requires anyone who receives more than $ 10,000 in cash from a client or customer in one or more related transactions  in the course of trade or business  to report the payment on a document known as form 8300.
kword document.
you are banned from.
rumors to the contrary have been that it would be a six billion mark issue or that the last bund a 7  issue due october 1999 would be increased by two billion marks.
stored label.
incorrect password.
percent.
packaging has some drawbacks.
old password.
width of handle.
number of undo levels 1  99.
new england electric based in westborough mass. had offered $ 2 billion to acquire ps of new hampshire well below the $ 2.29 billion value united illuminating places on its bid and the $ 2.25 billion northeast says its bid is worth.
in the seventh plan, the share of government sector stood at 41 percent of gross fixed investment, which will come down to 35.9 percent in the eighth plan.
the current position of the insertion cursor in chars.
specular.
dump the current pack file.
in his lawsuit mr. trudeau says the strike illegally included darkhorse and the cartoonist refused to honor the strike against the company.
click to draw the line.
louisburg.
initial time.
random hurl.
searching by description.
smtp greeting.
arabic.
premature end of file.
police bases in the past, there existed a vast gulf between the target and the achievements of the plans.
icon selection dialog.
rotation is clockwise.
french guiana.
open a file.
please check your installation.
hall beach.
unoptimizing animation.
the appropriate utilization of the existing infrastructure of the economy will also contribute to the increase in the growth rate of gross domestic product.
employment generation and human resource development the creation of productive employment opportunities in the country has been given top priority by this plan.
playback error.
however, owing to the constraints in the supply of necessary commodities and insufficient and incompatible initiatives, tourism has so far been a seasonal phenomenon and has not been able to make the desired headway.
maribor.
whether to put a separator between the message dialog's text and the buttons.
could not set mode 0700 on private peruser gnome configuration directory '.
web page.
america/stjohns.
the nih currently spends about $ 8 million annually on fetal-tissue research out of a total research budget of $ 8 billion.
hours after the announcement representatives of the orange county register were in a bar across the street recruiting.
unable to authenticate.
kastrup.
expected 'yes' or 'no' for boolean token got.
home email.
gunnison.
mark the selected messages as unimportant.
create automatically updating playlist where.
i won't be throwing 90 mph but i will throw 80-plus  he says.
usx corp. posted a 23  drop in third-quarter profit as improved oil results failed to offset weakness in steel and natural gas operations.
there is also speculation that mr. newhouse could bring in a powerhouse businessman or another newhouse family member to run the business side in combination with a publishing executive like robert gottlieb who left random house 's alfred a. knopf to run the new yorker also owned by the newhouse family.
replacement for undefined pixels.
columbia has only about 10 million common shares in public hands.
default graph incoming network traffic color.
take screenshot after specified delay in seconds.
error.
simplify image into an array of solidcolored squares.
crane lake.
furthermore, few of us nowadays, spend all our live sin our own small village or town.
words.
preserve luminosity.
system tools.
page tab.
close.
protocol corruption.
languages.
in tokyo the nikkei index of 225 selected issues was up 132.00 points to 35549.44.
specify where to create the folder.
gdp is the total value of a nation's output of goods and services.
lučenec.
it was crude oil that replaced coal in transport network on the land and the seas.
fallback icon theme name.
tag name.
accelerator to detach current tab.
cancel owner change?
overall, however, the plan made little headway creating the necessary base for economic development.
grid line color.
too similar.
unable to write.
shuffle.
scriptfu color selection.
sets the minimal number of operations that can be undone. more undo levels are kept available until the undosize limit is reached.
the following were neither barred nor suspended : stephanie veselich enright rolling hills calif. fined $ 2,500 and ordered to disgorge $ 11,762 ; stuart lane russel glendale calif. fined $ 2,500 and ordered to disgorge $ 14,821 ; devon nilson dahl fountain valley calif. fined $ 82,389.
customize the toolbar.
close all navigation windows.
the text of the label includes xml markup. see pangoparsemarkup.
minimum length of matched text.
urbanization has largely been influenced by the investment coming from remittance.
not a printable character.
this plan has adopted the strategy of promoting market oriented production which will contribute to the development of production as well as market facilities.
function.
investors switched trading focus quickly as they did tuesday reflecting uncertainty about long-term commitments to any issue or sector traders said.
nothing on the clipboard.
pacific/tarawa.
lamp or indicator light vertical.
there will be no harm if your judgment is silent and not published.
custom header.
saint lucia.
angola.
initially, the present government took steps to transform the controlled economy of the past thirty years into an open, liberal, transparent and competive market oriented economy.
america/denver.
record sound.
couldn't find standard objects when looking for objectlibs in  exiting.
stafford.
this address book will be removed permanently.
save current.
for a straight line.
africa/asmera.
norway house.
rectangle preferences.
lock the screen when last user disconnect.
updating the package lists requires administrative privileges, which you currently do not have. would you like to change to the root account?
scriptfu server options.
hardness.
module error.
create linear gradient.
the accessible role of this object.
transmitted bytes.
pattern stroke.
click to open up the path.
horizontally aligned valve.
the other has opposed a ban on cop-killer bullets.
fill transparent areas.
some researchers have charged that the administration is imposing new ideological tests for top scientific posts.
otherwise actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate.
europe/tirane.
the new rate will be payable feb. 15.
leighton e. cluff m.d. president robert wood johnson foundation princeton n.j.
nothing.
to avoid these costs and a possible default immediate action is imperative.
the eights play is a significant step initiated in that direction.
users.
whether to activate the default widget such as the default button in a dialog when enter is pressed.
i am always in awe of the different sounds made by the tireless wind.
in late afternoon new york trading the currency was at 1.8500 marks and 143.80 yen compared with 1.8415 marks and 142.85 yen.
africa/luanda.
error during file transfer.
monetary and credit situation: money supply increased at an average annual rate of 15.6 percent during the period from june/july 1962 to june/july 1990.
visit the gimp website.
send message.
besides, in the context of large under construction now being cost ineffective from financial perspective, doubt has been raised about the validity of their implementation.
playlist.
border color.
we didn't have the lock on file ', but we should have.
cisco hub.
coke and coal the estimated consumption of coke and coal for the eighth plan is 1,113,000 metric tons, which is expected to be met through import.
mongolian.
the court has indicated it will rule on the case by the end of the month.
new key passphrase.
nitra.
objects.
snippets archive.
tallinn.
olympia broadcasting corp. said it did n't make a $ 1.64 million semiannual interest payment due yesterday on $ 23.4 million of senior subordinated debentures.
add startup program.
pacific/gambier.
when without a stapler, a staple and a ruler will work.
partial fog.
closing this composer window will discard the message permanently, unless you choose to save the message in your drafts folder. this will allow you to continue the message at a later date.
at last count candela had sold $ 4 million of its medical devices in japan.
could not open link.
rather japanese investment will spur integration of certain sectors says kent calder a specialist in east asian economies at the woodrow wilson school for public and internatonal affairs at princeton university.
the fraction of total work that has been completed.
while neither admitting nor denying wrongdoing triton and mr. chase consented to findings of violations in connection with limited-partnership sales.
already in configuration file.
are you sure you want to delete this account?
now only one local ringer remains : 64-year-old derek hammond.
encrypt.
a program trade of $ 5 million of stock typically earns a razor-thin profit of $ 25,000.
pixbuf object.
command is insensitive.
fritzlar.
person.
dull blue 2.
bumpmap image.
in contrast the lawyers ' association gives a  well qualified  rating to those  regarded as one of the best available for the vacancy.
end event  link.
land reform was, in fact, an essential programme in a feudalistic rural society, but the inability to prepare accurate land records, lack of the guarantee of tenancy right, the existence of dual or multi ownership of land, inability to provide land for shelter and subsistence income, failure to keep prcords and make proper utilization of the collected savings, lack of diversification in crop farming and cottage industries in the rural sector and, above al, the lack of desirable growth in production and productivity during the thirty years if the panchayat regime have clearly evidenced the failure if lad reform.
insufficient memory to load image, try exiting some applications to free memory.
show hidden.
certificate signature algorithm.
whether the label is drawn in the selected font.
error executing search expression.
unstick.
unless there is something written one cannot read.
channel of track.
asia/anadyr.
whether the application supplied widget for custom previews should be shown.
proprietary.
emptying trash in.
didn't find a valid settings file at.
inner radius.
crow foot.
error console.
follow up flag.
size kb.
longaction.
the herald was a survivor from a bygone age  said j. kendrick noble a media analyst with painewebber inc.
screenshot directory.
sitiawan.
error in chat.
address book.
newline.
the national planning commission will have to play a significant role in the upgrading of such efficiency.
louisville.
palette file.
activity.
redorange.
save input device settings now.
but the same of the cement, brick and tile and match industries remained less than 60 percent.
canadian aboriginal.
painewebber inc. for instance is forecasting growth in s&p 500 dividends of just under 5  in 1990 down from an estimated 11  this year.
internal error adding a diversion.
survey returns received after the drop in the dow jones average were about the same as the views expressed prior to that event.
bold.
escape.
source 1.
there are a number of such plants in mumbai.
the increase in government expenditure and the lack of sufficient development in laternative inves tment sectors capable of attracting private savings have led to increase in consumption and the fall in gross domestic product.
ignoring font without family that will crash pango.
considering the fact that the non -governmental organizational and community organizations have been effectively engaged in rural development over the past several years, such organizations will be involved to the maximum possible extent in development activities during the eighth plan.
basic audio.
search all fields.
some dealers said the treasury 's intent is to help government bond dealers gauge investor demand for the securities given uncertainties about when the auction will occur.
using cdrom mount point mounting cdrom.
the second section index which fell 21.44 points monday was up 6.84 points or 0.19  to close at 3642.90.
gnome desktop theme.
get your game on with kubuntu.
first of america bank corp. said it completed its acquisition of midwest financial group inc. for about $ 250 million.
security information.
purged.
dunkirk.
lander.
not enough memory to load animation.
disable controller.
cyrillic transliterated.
break apart.
kárpathos.
confirm when expunging a folder.
any inbox.
batna.
failed to redirect output or input of child process.
playback speed.
retrieve subscriptions from server.
your yahoo! message did not get sent.
snippets.
budgetary deficit affects imports as well as balance of payments, which is a peculiar characteristic of a small economy like our.
vertically aligned propeller.
higher values restrict the effect to fewer areas of the image.
the total gross investment outlay for the eighth plan period is estimated to be rs. 170,332 million (table 2).
amqui.
as partisans of congressional power understand a  power of the purse  so broadly construed would emasculate the presidency and swallow the principle of separation of powers.
create a colormap with the options you specified above color density/function. the result is visible in the preview image.
send.
enable debug output matching a specified string.
move window one workspace down.
sort on hue.
open  closed  defer  conflict.
set your work phone number.
it did n't elaborate.
the public did n't come to the market to play a game ; they can go to off-track betting for that  says a. brean murray chairman of brean murray foster securities a traditional money management firm.
life in the city is very hectic.
mtwara.
key is null.
px.
object properties.
until now however buyers who wanted to finance part of a car purchase through general motors acceptance corp. could n't put their down payment on a charge card because of possible conflicts with truth-in-lending and state disclosure laws over finance rates says a spokesman for the gm finance arm.
junk test.
kansas.
frame shadow.
traditional chinese.
dcl script.
no images found in archive.
workspace.
not installed.
next image.
gimpressionist.
alter colors in various psychedelic ways.
gilts or british government bonds which also fell sharply initially retraced some of the losses to end about 3/8 point lower.
no resolution found.
recently,love and arranged marriages are also becoming popular.
mounting cdrom.
imperial beach.
hide the main window.
monetary and credit situation : the principal objective of the monetary policy of the period under revied was to regulate the rate of money supply at a level sustainable at the actual growth rate of national production and the national economy, to strengthen the financial base by introducing reforms in the financial sector, to make the  bank interest rates more realistic by enhancing the efficacy of indirect monetary control measures and  the economically deprived people and in the priority sectors.
flip type.
view or modify the properties of each selected item.
support for apple ipod devices show the content, play from device.
depth first.
leave the following recommendations unresolved.
pack too old.
normal size.
create union of selected paths.
but court quickly tumbled down a slippery slope.
like jaguar b.a.t also eased off its highs in afternoon dealings.
camera model.
sensor  right.
custom command.
start event  message.
standardized achievement tests are given about 10 million times a year across the country to students generally from kindergarten through eighth grade.
the financial times-stock exchange 100-share index closed 17.5 points higher at 2160.1.
unalaska.
max.
the dart was poisoned! the poison was deadly more.
issued on.
the nongovernmental organizations will be given full autonomy to function in specific priority areas.
every form of nature is very powerful which has ability to nourish as well as destroy us.
overweight and obese people suffer from many health complications such as diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and even cancer.
now rounded rectangle corners are not scaled when rectangles are scaled.
cannot create folder.
the main reasons for the balance of payment to be unfa vourable to the country during these years were the reduction of total export and the excessive increase in import resulting in great trade deficit.
whether buttons in dialogs should use the alternative button order.
opened log file.
unknown style attribute.
resuming detached session failed. press reconnect to create new connection.
whether the widget is visible.
whether the toolbar item is considered important. when true, toolbar buttons show text in gtktoolbarbothhoriz mode.
search forwards for the same text.
click to place vertical and horizontal guides.
the seven of diamonds.
cannot create folder lock on.
this led to anomalies in the allocation of resources.
stable storage device.
spacing.
elevation.
the increasing government participation and interference and the lack of a favorable atmosphere for the involvement of private sector also contributed to the slow growth of the industrial sector.
number of colors.
failed to create or open.
fort payne.
reims.
what are today's problem?
slovak.
such belts already are required for the vehicles ' front seats.
video chat.
temperature unit.
a detailed analysis reveals that there occurred a fundamental directional change in regular expenditure from the fiscal year 1974/75.
cpio archive.
who 's telling the truth ?
page preview.
cannot get message.
control rhythmbox using an infrared remote control.
view current processes and monitor system state.
these included china 's economic policies human rights and the question of mr. fang.
enable key echo? enter y or n.
destin.
mr. mcguigan cites three completed efforts in oklahoma.
dr. novello is deputy director of the national institute of child health and human development.
free/busy information to.
failed to stat the cdrom.
denison.
primary phone.
campbell river.
seed random number generator with a generated random number.
focal length.
color used to draw the link.
conclusion: viewed in the total perspective, in spite of massive investments made in the past, nepal still remains one of the  poorest nations of the world.
vilnius.
specified management expenses will be made available to be implemented in order solicit increased participation of the semi-governmental organisation, the non-governmental association/organisation and the private agency.
certificate authority trust.
allergan went up 1/2 to 19 3/8.
print selected contacts.
the surge brings to nearly 50 the number of country funds that are or soon will be listed in new york or london.
post a message to the mailing list this message belongs to.
no label.
create backup copies.
gnome virtual filesystem.
in addition upjohn is offering a one-time retirement bonus equal to six months of base pay.
no mail.
there may be speeches over the radio by the police officials.
areas of the factory were particularly dusty where the crocidolite was used.
input devices.
malformed header.
the name of the icon from the icon theme.
password.
this underwent a gradual change and the convertible foreign exchange began to gain predominance in july 1990.
mr. ridley 's decision fires the starting pistol for perhaps a costly contest between the world 's auto giants for britain 's leading luxury-car maker.
mark as complete.
like healthy regulatory capital.
that fund was put together by blackstone group a new york investment bank.
you can't add an archive to itself.
the sec will probably vote on the proposal early next year he said.
memory stick drive.
reload.
again and again program-trading 's critics raise the  casino  theme.
compare two candidates for mayor  says the announcer.
start.
sort torrents by.
tentatively accepted.
cannot create a folder by this name.
final, merged layer should be.
focus padding.
pattern.
error opening module '.
the finding marks a significant step in research on  bulk  superconductors which are aimed at use in wires for motors magnets generators and other applications.
since the new park will have only 1,500 spaces mr. christopher thinks backers are playing some fiscal  games  of their own with the voters.
two years ago the rev. jeremy hummerstone vicar of great torrington devon got so fed up with ringers who did n't attend service he sacked the entire band ; the ringers promptly set up a picket line in protest.
changes the visibility of the side pane in the current window.
reset order.
centrifuge.
south carolina 's reforms were designed for schools like greenville high school.
rows.
let gimp try to restore your last saved session on each startup.
there is no legacy of ancient factories to modernize or demolish.
move to trash.
he is just passing the buck to young people.
failed to open temporary file.
forwarded messages.
partially installed.
roman numeral list.
you must be inside a word to run this command.
during the panchayat regime, programmes were implemented with greater emphasis on the task of preserving the system than on national development.
the message to the board of education out of all this is we 've got to take a serious look at how we 're doing our curriculum and our testing policies in this state  said the talk-show host.
unknown element.
invalid program name.
print all subdirectories and entries under a directory, recursively.
the minimum unit is $ 100,000.
maximize horizontally the window.
the rules will eliminate filings policy-making divisions such as sales marketing finance and research and development mr. lane said.
documents.
mount airy.
sync keys.
packages being deleted due to unsatisfied dependencies these packages are being deleted because one or more of their dependencies is no longer available, or because another package conflicts with them.
room configuration error.
take screenshot.
this figure remained at 2.9 percents at current prices and 1.8 percent at constant prices in 1989/90.
command to invoke from the logout button.
answered.
this is the u.n. group that managed to traduce its own charter of promoting education science and culture.
at that meeting he said the justice department assured him that enforcement procedures would n't be threatened against attorneys without further review and advance notice.
according to these new rules, project chiefs are authorized to senction estimated expenditures if upto 5 million rupees, to approve tenders of upto 20 million rupees and to modify upto 10 percent of total expenditure on technical grounds.
dateeditor.
about.
failed to create gstreamer pipeline to play.
you look around at professional ballplayers or accountants  and nobody blinks an eye.
paper size.
are blacktopped, 103 kms. graveled and 371 kms. fair weather roads.
if true, remote users accessing the desktop are only allowed to view the desktop. remote users will not be able to use the mouse or keyboard.
broadcast.
summary.
in and around all levels of government in the u.s. are groups of people who can best be described as belonging to a political insider commercial party.
state.
flc animation.
key agreement is already started.
insert count of new messages into window title.
colonia.
mr. canepa confirmed he had consented to the sanctions but declined to comment further.
freecell.
d) in addition, it is appropriate to evaluate government financial position on the basis of current and constant process.
the amount of space between two consecutive rows.
middle dot.
value position.
they cited wall street 's recent volatility and the lack of a clear indication over the market 's short-term direction as factors in the institutional caution.
string not found.
free.
coloring type for selection.
this has some logic.
no one wants the u.s. to pick up its marbles and go home  mr. hormats says.
multiselect.
document ended unexpectedly inside an element name.
unknown grouping policy.
often judges ease into more lucrative private practice with little fanfare but not federal judge raul a. ramirez in sacramento calif.
objective c source code.
uri already loaded.
chronogram diagram objects.
yunnan.
move contact to.
open the selected folder.
each new trading roadblock is likely to be beaten by institutions seeking better ways to serve their high-volume clients here or overseas.
matsumoto.
small title font.
angle at which the label is rotated.
default.
during the period of three decades, the development of industry remained at the rudimentary stage and could not gain momentum.
the following packages will be reinstalled.
end process.
is this the future of chamber music ?
has separator.
syntax error in parameters or arguments.
asia/bangkok.
userdefined constants must begin with a capital letter does not.
higher values makes the highlights more focused.
signals test.
for the purpose of avoiding delays in the implementation of development projects, the methods of the disbursement of funds will be simplified and the allocated funds made available in good time.
ellipse select.
secondary color.
new all day event.
title and command.
department economists do n't expect 1989 to be as good a year as 1988 was.
ms. haag plays elianti.
in september the company said it was seeking offers for its five radio stations in order to concentrate on its programming business.
unable to change station property.
michael henderson 51-year-old group chief executive of this u.k. metals and industrial materials maker will become chairman in may succeeding ian butler 64 who is retiring.
lac la biche.
for your information.
yet, compared to historical growth rate (1974/75-1989/90), it is on the decline.
failed to unlock secret key 3 bad passphrases given.
buffers.
placement.
rhythmbox website.
curl up one of the image corners.
active workspace.
these studies have estimated that 4060 percent of the populations are living below the absolute poverty line.
algorithm.
allow postponing of breaks.
softphone.
elgamal.
keyboard events.
select zoom ratio.
secure shell key.
an pango font name. examples are "sans 12" or "monospace bold 14".
all of this must have been enormously frustrating to mr. katzenstein who *t*-59 went to sony with degrees in business and computer science and was raring to invent another walkman.
shortcuts.
channel.
king albert.
b.a.t industries which is being pursued by sir james goldsmith 's hoylake investments rose 9 to 753 on speculation that hoylake will sweeten its bid dealers said.
similarly, while each tourist during his stay in nepal spent $ 24.00 in 1961/62, the level of expenditure remained unchanged in 1989/90.
online services.
australia/hobart.
installing packages.
the demands of such producers are usually related to the goods and services which uses maximum local resources and labour.
decryption failed. you probably do not have the decryption key.
multiple selected objects have the same stroke.
custom color.
goes to previous table.
undo the last action.
stock left a.
when the original is deleted, its clones.
he's not thinking about home runs anymore just base hits.
america/santodomingo.
plugin can't handle layer offsets, size or opacity.
creating an artificial lake inevitably changes the character of a large area.
camarillo.
all information on this appointment will be deleted and can not be restored.
to capture the investment southeast asian nations will move to accommodate japanese business.
this growth rate is higher than that of the last three decades.
pagecurl effect.
absorb.
miter limit.
inverts the papers texture.
cannot be read.
uploaded of image data.
no proxy.
quoted string doesn't end with a quotation mark.
groupwise work screen name 2.
a few years ago the company offered two round-trip tickets on trans world airlines to buyers of its riviera luxury car.
water detection.
the physical or digital manifestation of this document mime type.
the company noted that it has reduced debt by $ 1.6 billion since the end of 1988 and bought back about 15.5 million shares of common stock since the fourth quarter of 1987.
but civilization has moved forward since then.
send / receive.
make keyboard selection commands work on objects in current layer only.
is used to notify that the table caption has changed this property should not be used. accessibletablecaptionobject should be used instead.
toolbar is visible.
at the same time though he chastised the media for paying such close attention to japanese investment when other foreign countries notably britain are acquiring more american assets.
document view.
custom.
forget it  he said as he handed her a paper.
the user has granted your request to add them to your buddy list.
increase the text size.
vitória da conquista.
remove all.
grid settings.
brush selection.
fingerprint and babbleprint for the key are.
message log.
internal error in adddiversion.
when the menu is a submenu, position it this number of pixels offset vertically.
where an assistant teacher is in charge, he should open the library regularly.
failed to create audio output element check your installation.
unwilling to put up new money for new zealand until those debts are repaid most banks refused even to play administrative roles in the new financing forcing an embarrassed nomura to postpone it this week.
marshall islands.
not at all.
search groups.
passport account not yet verified.
by enforcing regular exercise daily, these students would be exposed to the importance and benefits of exercise.
mitsubishi pencil co japan  60 million swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due dec. 31 1993 with a fixed 0.25  coupon at par via union bank of switzerland.
you can use it as you like.
the trade and transit impasse between nepal and india made 1989/90 an abnormal year, which also contributed to the trade with india drop to its lowest that year.
i believe you have to use the system to change it.
the hue of the video.
atlantic/faeroe.
ideas are going over borders and there 's no sdi ideological weapon that can shoot them down  he told a group of americans at the u.s. embassy on wednesday.
extension events.
may not be empty string.
toolbar style.
generate a new key of your own.
hibernate.
dependency.
move down.
get netstat information. valid options are route, active, multicast.
vertical offset of the first grid line this may be a negative number.
calendar or event document.
with this objective, while special emphasis has been given on the extension of rural roads, due importance has been attached to the provision of facilities like primary heath care, education and drinking water in rural sector.
what triggered the latest clash was a skirmish over the timing of a new zealand government bond issue.
lines.
expires on.
in a joint-venture deal mitsui guided candela through tokyo 's bureaucratic maze.
livingstone.
she taught us more in western civilization than i 've ever learned in other classes  says kelli green a greenville senior.
file details field ' not allowed in status file.
the funding is attached to an estimated $ 27.1 billion transportation bill that goes next to the senate and carries with it a proposed permanent smoking ban on virtually all u.s. domestic airline flights.
page down.
however third-quarter operating profit fell 14  as usx sold sizable chunks of its diversified and steel segments eliminating income from those operations.
back downtown the execs squeezed in a few meetings at the hotel before boarding the buses again.
nacogdoches.
the effect will be to pull asia together not as a common market but as an integrated production zone  says goldman sachs 's mr. hormats.
document type definition.
oh! how crucial and important these three hours can be is beyond any dispute.
the fast-food company said its decision was based upon discussions with a shareholder group giant group ltd.  in an effort to resolve certain disputes with the company.
during this period, a contraction in the money supply was caused by large increase in time deposits and the gradual growth of capital and other items.
circle depth in percent.
ambérieuenbugey.
lampedusa.
spot radius.
could not rename the folder.
knowing a tasty and free meal when they eat one the executives gave the chefs a standing ovation.
paste the partition from the clipboard.
indexing many investors mainly institutions follow an investment strategy of buying and holding a mix of stocks to match the performance of a broad stock-market barometer such as the s&p 500.
unsupported file extension given.
these cases lead to the loss of the firms ' social and international credibility  a ministry statement said.
jaguar shares skyrocketed yesterday after mr. ridley 's announcement following their temporary suspension on london 's stock exchange.
error while writing.
scope.
write extra mask file.
glass tile.
this will result in the melting of glaciers and the polar ice-caps.
ajaccio.
the problem here goes well beyond twisting legal doctrine.
there are no more moves.
failed to readlink.
this cute child turns out to be a blessing and a curse.
that sounded a lot like censorship so after years of letters and conversations that went nowhere i sued.
some of these children may be hyperactive, some may be badly behaved or uncontrollable.
create radial elliptic or circular gradient.
johannesburg.
macintosh binhexencoded file.
find for recursive returned unhandled error.
using new config file as default.
magenta.
solo woodwind players have to be creative if they want to work a lot because their repertoire and audience appeal are limited.
there 's an understanding on the part of the u.s. that japan has to expand its functions  in asia says j. michael farren undersecretary of commerce for trade.
fort lauderdale.
abstract class.
the federal reserve 's beige book a summary of economic conditions across the country indicated that the overall economy remains in a pattern of sluggish growth.
certificate already exists.
the waves race towards the shore with its frothy white foam.
offering the wine at roughly $ 65 a bottle wholesale $ 100 retail he sent merchants around the country a form asking them to check one of three answers : 1 no the wine is too high 2 responses ; 2 yes it 's high but i 'll take it 2 responses ; 3 i 'll take all i can get 58 responses.
could not open converter from to.
ladysmith.
mr. mehta is widely viewed as a brilliant editor but a less-than-brilliant administrator and his own departure was rumored recently.
freezing fog.
orientation map editor.
could not rename to.
a response overflowed the buffer.
firewire disk tests.
inheritance type.
create a new calendar.
expected list of got list of.
information/calendar.
the prevailing interpretation of the clause on capitol hill is that it gives congress an omnipresent veto over every conceivable action of the president through the ability to withhold funding.
change the color lightness by this percentage for each column.
manually selecting the eyes may improve the results.
the share price was languishing at about 400 pence before ford 's sept. 19 announcement of its interest in a minority stake.
select a conference server to query.
vertical text.
given domain.
volume control.
iowa city.
keeping old config file as default.
passphrase for new secure shell key.
position on the color wheel.
measure path.
foreign prime rates : canada 13.50  ; germany 9  ; japan 4.875  ; switzerland 8.50  ; britain 15.
lift.
how much to "darken" the drop shadow.
use linear mapping instead of any trigonometrical function for this color channel.
he said the ban wo n't stop privately funded tissue-transplant research or federally funded fetal-tissue research that does n't involve transplants.
there also persists the problem of purification of drinking water.
gnomeentry.
in a post-hearing news conference mr. phelan who has publicly expressed concern about market volatility said he told the house finance and telecommunications subcommittee that he would support the program-trading halt proposal  providing the sec would be comfortable with the language  in a bill.
generic pressure source.
access files.
affiliation.
sumitomo realty & development rose 40 to 2170.
hammond.
workgroup switch voiceenabled.
although a total investment of rs. 61,139 million is proposed for the public sector, it will be necessary to spend development out lay equivalent to rs. 113.479 million during the eighth plan period.
skipping already downloaded file.
projects guaranteeing high people's participation,  projects that can be implemented, operated and maintained by users themselves; and projects requiring minimum government investment,.
compare against.
formal parameter data.
nancy.
mode of operation.
error removing list.
toggles whether to read just the current table cell or the whole row.
click to erase.
inefficient administration inefficiency in the administration has led to a further deterioration in the governmentâ€™s institutional abilities to effectively implement development programmes.
stroke to path.
remember password.
dispel.
keyboard shortcut to open the menu bars.
should we be concerned about the greenhouse effect ?
module path.
nabesna.
skew.
initiate chat.
no reason.
but there is also a discordant modern note in aslacton though it ca n't be heard by the church-goers enjoying the peal of bells this cool autumn evening.
you can only view changelogs of official debian packages.
invalid value for icon type.
this trial is expected to last five weeks.
join chat.
blinders.
shrink the document.
repulse bay.
the ten of hearts.
literate haskell.
still he added if the industrial sector remains relatively stable rockwell should be able to recover in the second half and about equal fiscal 1989 's operating profit of $ 630.9 million.
show location bar in new windows.
in another action the itc dismissed anti-dumping act complaints filed by du pont co. of wilmington del. against imports of neoprene a type of synthetic rubber from france and west germany.
collapse all message threads.
the last thing they needed was another drag-down blow.
cyrillic.
are you sure you want to cancel the current operation?
work days.
budgetary deficit, monetary and structural variables of the economy cause monetary expansion and price determination.
but in 1986 program traders received what amounted to an exemption from the uptick rule in certain situations to make it easier to link the stock and futures markets.
email certificate authority.
santos.
opening.
packages not yet reassembled.
what 's wrong with asking for more money ?
play / pause.
eraser.
round trip time statistics.
startup.
receive.
select custom icon.
save search as.
these vertically integrated combines some of which got their start in japan 's feudal period deal globally in commodities construction and manufacturing.
architecture analysis  design language diagram objects.
the company which recently said it lacked the profits and capital to pay dividends on its series a convertible preferred stock said it has hired an investment banker to help it raise additional cash.
interviews with analysts and business people in the u.s. suggest that japanese capital may produce the economic cooperation that southeast asian politicians have pursued in fits and starts for decades.
select objects to duplicate.
start a new game.
the heat would be used to turn the turbines of electric generators.
private clean.
disabled.
the ssh command failed.
connect anonymously.
but the army corps of engineers expects the river level to continue falling this month.
style scheme id.
true if the window should receive the input focus.
sylvania.
byzantine musical symbols.
couldn't change primary user id.
verify your system installation. the totem plugin will now exit.
that impressed robert b. pamplin georgia-pacific 's chief executive at the time whom mr. hahn had met while fundraising for the institute.
this led to arbitrary estimates of resources likely to be available in the plan period.
unknown error executing child process.
thus in 1989/90 each post office provided service to 8100 people within an area of 66 sq.km. b.
ignore buddy?
separator.
paste text.
the bulk of the pretax charge is a $ 62 million *u* write-off of capitalized servicing at the mobile home financing subsidiary which the company said had been a big drain on earnings.
group radio.
the announcement follows a sharper $ 2.2 billion decline in the country 's foreign reserves in september to $ 86.12 billion.
viacom denies it 's using pressure tactics.
please insert the disc labeled in the drive and press enter.
do not use shared memory between gimp and plugins.
the proposed changes also would allow executives to report exercises of options later and less often.
but many of these reforms are unneeded even harmful.
status.
troff ms input document.
the printer “” is currently offline.
grab focus.
yes or no.
revision history.
hebbronville.
agriculture is even today primarily dependent on weather condition.
couldn't change password.
error options.
this increase, again, was due mainly to the expansion in the agricultural land reather than an increase in productivity or the use of agricultural inputs.
decreases the speech rate.
all local and active remote folders.
bad address '.
zoom multiplier.
add bookmark.
start preferred visual assistive technology application.
end event  cancel.
vertical view.
compress display of addresses in to/cc/bcc.
create clone.
thursday.
suddenly, a motorcycle roared past me, almost knocking me down.
last played.
it should be large enough to serve the needs of the school.
bad password.
italic.
reads the selected preset into memory.
america/boavista.
draw focus of control.
america/eirunepe.
replace.
mr. veraldi worked at ford for 40 years holding a variety of car and parts-engineering positions.
when accepted.
view all the packages on the system in a single uncategorized list.
seconds.
warning the source and the destination are the same channel.
choose the order of information to appear beneath icon names. more information will appear when zooming in closer.
anhui.
first they are designed to eliminate the risk of prepayment mortgage-backed securities can be retired early if interest rates decline and such prepayment forces investors to redeploy their money at lower rates.
change the number of workspaces of the screen to number.
no priority or zero specified for pin.
glendive.
antarctica/southpole.
already 10 local councils have refused to honor fees and payments to banks incurred during various swaps dealings.
eagle river.
what becomes custom in the bush administration will only become more difficult for future presidents including democrats to undo.
adjustment.
internal frame.
drexel meanwhile already competes at a disadvantage to its big wall street rivals because it has a slightly lower commercial paper rating.
devhelp support.
long desc.
unknown file name.
horizontal spacing.
and 19.6  of consumers contacted believed business conditions will improve in the coming six months compared with 18.3  in september.
east german leader krenz called the protests in his country a  good sign  saying that many of those marching for democratic freedoms were showing support for  the renovation for socialism.
churchill.
the big board 's uptick rule prevents the short sale of a stock when the stock is falling in price.
in big cities like new york, london, kolkata and delhi the noisy traffic is the biggest menace.
message header.
no versions available.
error mapping into memory.
available.
bad action character.
a jackson requirement phenomenon.
free select.
solid noise.
hollow ellipse.
wireless router.
create new partition.
flip path.
text direction, e.g. righttoleft or lefttoright.
start server.
determines whether metacity is a compositing manager.
bad mode.
weather cloudy.
whether to hint xft fonts 0no, 1yes, 1default.
error reading file.
it is because of the absence of trees that rajasthan is more or less a desert area.
no action possible.
du bois.
swap folder.
one of debug, info, warning, error or critical.
redo the last undone action.
resubscribe.
terms were n't disclosed.
started.
blur / sharpen.
hdf document.
the company said it made the purchase in order to locally produce hydraulically operated shovels.
file exists.
sets square aspect ratio.
tocumen.
however, those who are successful are only a handful.
only check for junk messages in the inbox folder.
villagers go abut their tasks during the day and rest in the evenings.
resize the canvas automatically on file load.
spread out clones to reduce clumping can be applied repeatedly.
border selection by.
device.
many asians regard a u.s. presence as a desirable counterweight to japanese influence.
pause all torrents.
edit document metadata to be saved with the document.
if true, users can expand the window beyond its minimum size.
punctuation, other.
the following packages have been kept back.
thus, limiting the scope of the government to some specific areas, the development and extension of all other areas will be left open to private sector.
device information.
show heading.
zoom to.
unknown command.
search you must provide at least one search term.
magenta.
dark rain clouds were gathering in the sky.
opening.
accordingly, the district development committee act 1992, the municipality act 1992 and the village development committee act, 1992 have been formulated and implemented.
roughness.
phoenix.
hide.
a file named already exists.
former maintainers.
effect operator.
is no longer away.
gray mode.
marathon.
the memo could not be deleted because permission was denied.
spangdahlem.
by extension.
icon.
please pick the icon you want.
buddy state notification.
show mounted volumes on the desktop.
takashima & co japan  50 million swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due march 31 1994 with a fixed 0.25  coupon at par via yamaichi bank switzerland.
subprocess.
does the cursor blink in this rich text item?
antarctica/vostok.
gecko is controlling the caret.
sacramento.
saving.
virtual folder email provider.
what worries credit-rating concerns the most is that wall street firms are taking long-term risks with their own capital via leveraged buy-out and junk bond financings.
failure forking.
/options/enable sounds.
fort good hope.
expect brushbacks but no beanballs says mr. mcenaney.
attribute is invalid on element in this context.
he will be in charge of research equity sales and trading and the syndicate operation of rothschild.
difference of gaussians.
cambridge bay.
delimiter.
name of a monospaced fixedwidth font for use in locations like terminals.
terms were n't disclosed.
in composite trading on the new york stock exchange telerate shares closed at $ 19.50 up 12.5 cents.
unrecognized tasks.
resuming session.
finishing freehand.
lock or unlock current layer.
home fax.
switch to c/clockwise.
there have been only seven other times in 1929 1933 1961 1965 1968 1971 and 1972 when the yield on the s&p 500 dropped below 3  for at least two consecutive months mr. perritt found.
compose a reply to the sender of the selected message.
copy color.
villamontes.
generic text note.
in the last.
pgp key.
the price is a new high for california cabernet sauvignon but it is not the highest.
the ginnie mae 9  securities were yielding 9.32  to a 12-year average life.
spacing between thumb/steppers and outer trough bevel.
one should keep to the margin of the road while walking and the vehicles must keep to their lanes in busy streets.
could not make directory.
the import from india which stood at rs. 7,772.4 million in 1990/91 increased to rs. 11,815.9 million in 1991/92.
ran out of time while trying to resolve dependencies press to try harder.
priorities in view of the limited financial, human and institutional resources of the country, it will not be possible to provide adequate resources to all activities within a single plan period.
angle menu.
icon has zero height.
save changes to document before closing? if you close without saving, your changes will be discarded.
enable layer  channel previews.
search for a buddy by email address.
cannot activate object from factory.
open an existing document.
accelerator label.
the result is inefficient responses to sound.
height of rectangle.
cursor theme size.
barnsley 2.
simple heat exchanger.
the government owned corporations must strengthen their management to enhance their work efficiency.
21st.
saturationl.
jogging is fast becoming a regular exercise routine found in most neighborhoods.
coningsby.
geometry.
network device.
for reading mail as a query of another set of folders.
convey.
axiom.
remember forever.
could not determine which export filter to use to save.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 12.
document ' has no top level node.
officials from the various banks involved are expected to meet during the next few days to consider other arrangements with local authorities that could be questionable.
the market available to nepalese exporters in limited.
in local permit/deny.
saturation frequency.
such a state of counterproductive investments in irrigation sector is sure to make a negative impact on the national economy.
rise set.
0 transparent.
you have new mail.
creating new connector.
available.
unknown type on element.
the text on the button.
there was an error displaying help.
cantonese pronunciation.
the move is designed to ward off a hostile takeover attempt by two european shipping concerns stena holding ag and tiphook plc.
change preferences for this program.
failed to write cache file.
debug.
prince edward island.
append to current document.
asia/aden.
file a bug report about a symptom. implied if symptom name is given as only argument.
digits.
goal type.
thus the extent of deficit financing will be much lower in this plan than in the previous plans.
in the industrial sector, emphasis was placed on the completion of projects already underway.
at the university level, it is even more apparent.
whereas conventional securities financings are structured to be sold quickly wall street 's new penchant for leveraged buy-outs and junk bonds is resulting in long-term lending commitments that stretch out for months or years.
geographic site.
preserve luminosity.
comments about the program.
propagating alpha channel.
gtk configuration.
antarctica/syowa.
others 3.
spirals.
digital imaging and communications in medicine image.
the firm also has been hit with big financial settlements with the government stemming from its guilty plea to six felonies related to a big insider-trading scandal.
next thread.
save the current settings to the specified file.
enter the new package grouping mechanism for this display.
sending updated information allows other participants to keep their task lists up to date.
objects to design network diagrams with.
didn't understand ' extra unescaped  found inside pair.
number of columns.
erlang.
the u.s. with its regional friends must play a crucial role in designing its architecture.
midi audio.
failed to activate object.
faraday cage.
description of an object, formatted for assistive technology access.
there were no incentives to attract investment towards industries directly associated with the need of the society.
many individuals have earned world fame as designers.
our main challenge is that we are not being able to fully harness the water resources available in our country.
keep.
normal window.
loading.
installing.
warning untrusted versions of the following packages will be installed! untrusted packages could compromise your system's security. you should only proceed with the installation if you are certain that this is what you want to do.
export.
start playback.
new york-based pop radio provides through a national in-store network a customized music information and advertising service which simulates live radio.
it is the way of nature.
apply.
thus, by the end of f.y. 1991/92, one post office served 8146 people in an area of 65 sq. kms. b.
use font in label.
hide task value.
according to available statistics, while the forest coverage was 6,402,000 ha. in 1964, this was reduced to 6,306,000 ha. by the end of f.y. 1985/85.
but nothing here is without risk.
information.
horizontal scale.
gradient flare.
although the country is well endowed with abundant biomass and hydropower resources, the pace of industrialization is felt to have slowed down in the recent year mainly because of the lack of energy and power.
linear gradient.
cgi program.
craiova.
mostar.
on the other hand, during the same period, the share of revenue in gross domestic product reached to only 10 percent from 3 percent.
enter a name for this buffer.
ranks.
irrigation programme will be implemented in accordance with irrigation policy 1992, high priority has been given to peoples' participation in the eighth plan.
calculating.
poverty alleviation despite the development efforts of the past, the population living below the poverty line has been steadily increasing and the majority of such poverty ridden people live in the rural areas.
dependencies.
large staggered.
karlsruhe.
after years of struggling the los angeles herald examiner will publish its last edition today shut down by its parent hearst corp. following unsuccessful efforts to sell the venerable newspaper.
utility window.
selected object is not a path, cannot inset/outset.
when implementing any project a fixed sum of money will be borne by nepal government and the rest by the users' committee.
delete current control stop from gradient.
in the 1990s spurred by rising labor costs and the strong yen these companies will increasingly turn themselves into multinationals with plants around the world.
remove the nines.
asheboro.
ventilator.
new tab.
invalid entry in style definition group.
sat.
tarvisio.
browser.
chinese simplified.
light 1.
the sound of bells is a net to draw people into the church  he says.
interactive scheme development.
pop up an alert.
j.l. henry has n't any miami telephone listing an operator said.
past is already passed.
firewall service module.
firstly, water from rivers is used for irrigation, secondly, for generation of hydroelectricity and for domestic purpose.
inheritance type.
always trust keys in my keyring when encrypting.
if boeing goes ahead with the larger 767 the plane could hit the market in the mid-1990s.
pixels of blank space below paragraphs.
it is also useful to explorers in helping them to travel to places where other methods of transport cannot be used.
plugin browser.
is not a valid server name.
portuguese.
is not suitable for audio or video media.
you can only run 'recompose' if the active image was originally produced by 'decompose'.
2. tweak the picked value.
create a new partition in the selected unallocated space.
modify exception.
software.
esso australia ltd. a unit of new york-based exxon corp. and broken hill pty. operate the fields in a joint venture.
correlated noise.
flowed text.
sorry, channels and masks can not be rotated.
remove connection points.
threshold does not operate on indexed layers.
3.2 communication a.
therefore, the state directed and controlled economic systems pursued for the last thirty years will be gradually phased out and policies will be adopted to carry out development through free marketoriented liberal economic systems.
today pc shipments annually total some $ 38.3 billion world-wide.
color profile.
applixware graphics image.
parents must lead an exemplary life which can benefit their children by increasing awareness on the health benefits of exercising regularly.
kilobytes.
test.
new debtags browser.
palestine.
all factories have evolved essentially because of interaction between man and material.
previous block.
could not find help directory.
im status style.
label widget.
and many emerging markets have outpaced more mature markets such as the u.s. and japan.
restore icons' original sizes.
first page.
mouse gestures.
floating point number.
failed to create thumbnail folder.
dropper preferences.
critics say south carolina is paying a price by stressing improved test scores so much.
kicked by.
warning performing this action will probably cause your system to break! do not continue unless you know exactly what you are doing!
version will be installed automatically.
topright.
hangul.
taking into consideration the reserves of both convertible and non-consideration currencies together, while it could meet the import for 5.8 months in fy 1960/61, it was capable of meeting 7.6 months import in 1989/90.
find out about magnatune at.
the santa ana bonds were tentatively priced to yield from 6.40  in 1991 to 7.458  in bucking the market trend an issue of $ 130 million general obligation distributable state aid bonds from detroit mich. apparently drew solid investor interest.
settings.
dynamic grid.
foreground color.
grab a single window.
recompute center.
set user info.
cannot find signature digests.
multiple export filters with unique name.
in addition hadson said it will write off about $ 3.5 million in costs related to international exploration leases where exploration efforts have been unsuccessful.
width for text box.
it acquired thomas edison 's microphone patent and then immediately sued the bell co. claiming that the microphone invented by my grandfather emile berliner which had been sold to bell for a princely $ 50,000 infringed upon western union 's edison patent.
artists.
and in the chicago district the report said  a manufacturer of capital goods noted slower orders for some types including defense equipment petroleum equipment food packaging machinery and material handling equipment.
horizontal limiting line.
warning failed to parse default value ' for schema.
changing password for.
upper.
nothing selected.
similarly, by mid july 1991, thee government sector had received rs, 7,373.1 million out of the total bank credit and investment disbursement of rs. 24,410.5 millions.
measure tool measure distances and angles.
yield.
during its centennial year the wall street journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of american business history.
many email systems add an apparentlyto header to messages that only have bcc recipients. this header, if added, will list all of your recipients to your message anyway. to avoid this, you should add at least one to or cc recipient.
but mr. barnum called that  a worst-case  scenario.
nashville.
split pane.
occidental petroleum corp. shelf offering of $ 1.5 billion in senior debt securities.
please enter a valid domain address and try again.
crossroads.
getting information of all users on.
add in data port.
note providing the virtual package is already installed.
forward contacts.
create archive.
the current time.
increase the playback volume.
data source.
message body.
mr. gillespie at viacom says the ratings are rising.
object signer.
the rifles were n't loaded.
move text layer.
marked up text to render.
pacific/marquesas.
configuration error.
the company acknowledges some problems.
unable to find include file.
gaps.
america/aruba.
the jack of clubs.
scales.
show grid.
in 1960/61, this corporation had initiated its service with 6 aeroplanes.
transamerica corp. san francisco said third-quarter profit was essentially flat despite a large one-time gain a year earlier.
finding edges.
what can be done to alleviate suffering in the world ?
crotone.
add rule.
stopped.
in spite of such advantages of rivers, people are polluting water resources by throwing wastage garbage, dead bodies, and waste materials.
the statement emphasized that holders representing 75  of the shares voting at a special shareholders ' meeting must agree to lift the takeover restrictions.
return 0 if the directory exists, 2 if it does not.
ancient greek numbers.
africa/malabo.
subscription.
whether this tag affects the font family.
he launched into saint-saens's  the swan from carnival of the animals  a favorite encore piece for cellists with lovely glossy tone and no bite.
screenshot.
a driver has to find something to hang the carrier on so the company supplies a window hook.
until such action takes places the treasury has no ability to issue new debt of any kind.
meknes.
screen.
contact list owner.
international nongovernmental organizations have been playing a significant role over the pats several years in the development functions in nepal.
move or copy files previously selected by a cut or copy command.
norman.
click! you trigger a rolling boulder trap! you are hit by a boulder! more.
the competition has grown more intense as bigger banks such as norwest corp. of minneapolis and chemical banking corp. of new york extend their market-share battles into small towns across the nation.
error while parsing.
modern teaching includes the body as well as the mind. a child must express himself and have an outlet.
although the size of negative savings is expected to reduce towards the end of the plan upon gradual improvements over the budgeting and accounting systems used in regular and development budgets, it will take a number of years to make the public sector capable of generating savings.
hint for item 1.
the last time the s&p 500 yield dropped below 3  was in the summer of 1987.
zoom ratio.
use markup.
the selection mode.
shimla.
sweden.
no current layer.
hole spacing.
wall street is facing a catch-22 situation  says mr. mahoney of moody 's.
save gamma.
tentative all.
unexpected end of line after package name at line.
cancel all.
science is on the way to finding the cause, and therefore the elimination of cancer and other inherited diseases.
although this growth rate would seem ambitious in the light of past experiences, it will be possible to achieve the above mentioned growth rate in the new political and economic environment.
3. apply the value to the clones'.
returns less than.
could not rename folder to.
grow.
neither first securities of beverly hills nor mr. vargas could be reached for comment.
reading palette file  missing blue component in line.
smooth control.
send message.
used to connect to other computers.
' is not one of ' or '.
error parsing point.
during the period prior the the restoration of democracy, a three year plan and five year plans were formulated and implemented.
edit buddy comment.
maximize window.
feather edges.
europe/kiev.
the september index was 47.1.
style of underline for this text.
message in several formats.
move window to workspace 1.
button task.
joint management system will be applied for involving the users in the management of multipurpose, large an medium projects with special emphasis given on irrigation management training institutional development at the farmers' level and access to technical services.
mr. harper expressed confidence that he and mr. baum can convince the board of their worthiness to run the company.
toulouse.
newsweek trying to keep pace with rival time magazine announced new advertising rates for 1990 and said it will introduce a new incentive plan for advertisers.
requested action not taken insufficient system storage.
in 1966 on route to a re-election rout of democrat frank o'connor gop gov. nelson rockefeller of new york appeared in person saying  if you want to keep the crime rates high o'connor is your man.
moves flat review to the beginning of the next line.
taking over as chief executive officer in 1983 he inherited a company that was mired in debt and hurt by a recession-inspired slide in its building-products business.
no stroke.
whether dropdowns should look like lists rather than menus.
protect.
notched right arrow.
spacing.
gander.
kuantan.
maximized horizontally.
pounds.
map from top.
a spokesman for temple estimated that sea containers ' plan if all the asset sales materialize would result in shareholders receiving only $ 36 to $ 45 a share in cash.
the bougainville copper mine has been inoperative since may 15 because of attacks by native landowners who want bougainville to secede from papua-new guinea.
not a valid activation id.
unable to minimize the upgrade set.
policies following policies will be pursued for achieving the irrigation targets set 1.
for.
3.send your child to a university.
compose message.
search complete.
it was not an unpleasant evening certainly thanks to the high level of performance the compositional talents of mr. douglas and the obvious sincerity with which mr. stoltzman chooses his selections.
in syracuse n.y. dydee service 's new marketing push stresses environmental awareness.
that followed four straight months in which the number of increases trailed the year-earlier pace.
warning unknown group.
palette to use in the color selector.
the distance from the center of the image determines the direction of the stroke.
the company said local authorities held hearings on the allegations last spring and had returned the plant to  routine inspection  in august.
rgb alpha.
file browser virtual root directory.
browse packages using debtags data.
showing the desktop.
register register with a chat room.
clarifier or settling tank.
the following packages are unused and will be removed.
eldoret.
campbell soup not surprisingly does n't have any plans to advertise in the magazine according to its spokesman.
on the agricultural front, the development of marketoriented production pattern is necessary for the growth in integrated and coordinated manner to agricultural inputs, services, incentives and irrigation facilities.
portorož.
trace.
source list entries for this disc are.
gadsden.
start.
hardware.
that way investors can essentially buy the funds without paying the premium.
an unsupported stream action was attempted.
choose lyrics folder.
view or modify the properties of the open folder.
thus, majority of the people in the country are as yet deprived from an access to hygienic supply of water in spite of the fact that expansion of drinking water facility had taken place in the past.
auto update preview.
topcliffe.
paint shop pro image.
show fields.
free/busy template url.
investor focus shifted quickly traders said.
empathy should use the avatar of the contact as the chat window icon.
enable and disable plugins.
color chooser.
no more layers below.
change to.
europe/london.
failure incorrect signature.
just as all plaintiffs are not alike it turns out that des defendants marketed the drugs differently and may have offered different warranties.
georgian.
retrieving pop summary.
as a foster corporate parent you will experience the same joy felt by robert bass lewis ranieri william simon and others who find ways to help troubled savings institutions and their employees help themselves.
some packages could not be authenticated.
there appeared there significant trends in forging assistance during this period.
soviets remain in charge of education programs a former head of an african military tribunal for executions is in charge of culture and a hard-line polish communist in exile directs the human-rights and peace division.
make a bitmap copy.
work address label.
sensitive.
puerto ayacucho.
dd acquisition said the extension is to allow this process to be completed.
while u.s. officials voice optimism about japan 's enlarged role in asia they also convey an undertone of caution.
at the same time the government did n't want to appear to favor gm by allowing a minority stake that might preclude a full bid by ford.
with only two issues under its belt garbage has alienated some would-be advertisers and raised the ire of others.
is missing dropping.
only display the signatures of people i trust.
the amount of space between two consecutive columns.
improper addressing.
junk after.
a person blind from birth has no concept of vision, so presumably does not miss' sight.
in 1991/92, the meager growth of 0.1 percent in agricultural sector are believed to provide impetus to the growth rate of non â€“agricultural sector in the years to come.
show appointment end times in week and month views.
secondary.
image templates.
magnetic energy.
sfe technologies said william p. kuehn was elected chairman and chief executive officer of this troubled electronics parts maker.
importing key. enter passphrase.
simple heat exchanger, vertical.
show size.
it's one more too for the fans who dream of a season that *t*-52 never ends.
row spacing.
china lake.
stretch contrast to cover the maximum possible range.
pattern fill.
parameter data.
dease lake.
failed to change to directory.
spray drier.
sign.
the pupils burst into a loud cheer, thinking of the break they would have from dreary school lessons.
delete selected vector.
news.
numbering.
couldn't handle foreign object type.
channel authentication is used to secure the channel from unauthorized access. the authentication may be based on passphrase and digital signatures. if passphrase is set, it is required to be able to join. if channel public keys are set then only users whose public keys are listed are able to join.
document ended unexpectedly inside an attribute name.
on the other hand, it is estimated that about 40 percent of the available drinking water is being list through leakage.
in the early days, only selective pieces of information related to secret services and security were sold confidentially.
secondary forward stepper.
error communicating with server. closing connection.
key theme name.
deleting downloaded files.
pakistan.
number of segments.
paul sandifer director of testing for the south carolina department of education says mr. cannell 's allegations of cheating  are purely without foundation  and based on unfair inferences.
text to render.
package which provides is not installed.
redo.
document ended unexpectedly, expected to see a close angle bracket ending the tag.
the package index files are corrupted. no filename field for package.
invalid password file entry.
delete feed and files.
to make them directly comparable each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
while, this ration was about 1 percent in 1974/75, it increased to 8.5 percent in 1989/90.
recenter midpoints in selection.
dd acquisition corp. a partnership of unicorp canada corp. 's kingsbridge capital group and cara operations ltd. extended to nov. 20 its $ 45-a-share offer for all dunkin' donuts inc. shares outstanding.
didn't understand ' extra unescaped  found inside list.
error unsetting '.
invalid unicode.
wrap mode.
shirley.
rep. jerry lewis a conservative californian added a provision of his own intended to assist bolivia and the senate then broadened the list further by including all countries in the u.s. caribbean basin initiate as well as the philippines - backed by the powerful hawaii democrat sen. daniel inouye.
empty text layer.
tasks due today color.
classic view.
unexpected error in select reading data from a child process.
percent done.
central european.
unable to add a layer mask since the layer already has one.
list of authors of the programs.
in the treasury market investors paid scant attention to the day 's economic reports which for the most part provided a mixed view of the economy.
leadville.
show options to modify properties of a workspace.
no sane value to store.
travelers corp. 's third-quarter net income rose 11  even though claims stemming from hurricane hugo reduced results $ 40 million.
vertical scale per row in  of tile height.
he gave up seven hits walked five and didn't get a decision.
she took her business to first atlanta.
he cites the recent deal between the mitsubishi estate co. and the rockefeller group as well as the possible white knight role of an undisclosed japanese company in the georgia-pacific corp. takeover bid for great northern nekoosa corp. as evidence.
sets the text to appear in image window titles.
mr. trudeau a writers guild member also was employed as a writer for darkhorse which was covered by a guild collective-bargaining agreement.
could not open for writing.
wave type.
the administration 's plan could cost utilities mainly those that use coal up to $ 4 billion a year.
map images to box faces.
attachment.
network servers icon name.
beginning of row.
python console.
unless it can raise money in financial markets mr. basham said the federal government wo n't have the cash to pay off $ 13.8 billion in treasury bills that mature on thursday.
therefore, it is imperative to develop a time bound educational framework and encourage the private sector involvement in higher education.
not installed but configs remain.
america/riobranco.
destination.
the remittances sent by the migrant workers have been keeping the national economy afloat for many years.
change the angle of the selected vector.
choose icon.
gioia del colle.
trace no active desktop.
bonobo support.
sales were roughly flat in the 1989 model year compared with a year earlier though industry sales fell.
really discard your personal settings and reload the defaults?
van gogh lic.
failed to set modification time.
americans today spend $ 15,000 like pocket change they do n't think much about it.
guber/peters has been locked in litigation with warner communications inc. in an attempt to get out of an exclusive production contract with warner.
you can stop this operation by clicking cancel.
inadequate participation of nongovernmental organisations and the private sectors in the implementation of irrigation projects.
move onto.
pack bits.
failed to resolve.
the import from india which stood at rs. 7,772.4 million in 1990/91 increased to rs. 11,815.9 million in 1991/92.
mesquite.
every.
select printer color profile.
list of the ids of the available languages.
network tools.
access the image menu.
bangui.
create a clone a copy linked to the original of selected object.
of the remaining 43.7 percent rs.74,355 million 26.6 percent rs. 19,761 million will be financed through foreign grants and 73.4 percent rs. 54,594 million through external loans.
the constant exposure to noise deteriorates the tender parts of the mid ear.
new appointment.
san antonio.
yesterday 's announcement was made after markets closed.
sort descending.
font weight.
the package cache file is an incompatible version.
the name of the program.
needs a single argument.
manual page compressed.
chita.
interpublic on tv : interpublic group said its television programming operations which it expanded earlier this year agreed to supply more than 4,000 hours of original programming across europe in 1990.
show style.
new task.
the location or file could not be found.
frequent drought and excessive rain have hampered the actual growth of agricultural reduction on one and, while on the other, the rapid population growth has led to a situation of food import for meeting the growing demand.
not a directory.
hexadecimal number.
select gradient folders.
check spelling while i type.
sent to calendar as declined.
special constant.
please use a different name.
keep aspect.
a garden owes its charms to the myriad shades of colours of flowers and plants.
extraction not performed.
replyto field.
move waste back to stock.
failed on message.
add.
games.
attach.
therefore, in order to raise the productivity of the government sector, special emphasis will have to be given on the method of selecting appropriate projects, appropriate pricing policy, reformative institutionalized systems of monitoring and evaluation and the privatization of government undertakings.
human readable name.
u.s. stock-index futures are n't even traded in japan now.
the telephone line and population ration stood at 1290 by january 1991 with the distribution of 65,298 telephone lines in 38 urban areas.
palm os database.
name service.
creating mailbox file.
editability set.
switch to tab 6.
anxious.
vertical alignment for child.
the plan calls for closing at least nine plants and eliminating about 3,600 jobs.
conflicting options are present or and.
the default width for the sidebar, in pixels.
sensor beam.
timmins.
pixels in the foreground color will appear black in all output images. this can be used for things like crop marks that have to show up on all channels.
rendering.
decrease tile opacity by this percentage for each row.
what to do with executable text files when they are activated single or double clicked. possible values are "launch" to launch them as programs, "ask" to ask what to do via a dialog, and "display" to display them as text files.
africa/banjul.
mr. coleman said this week that he would devote the remainder of the political season to positive campaigning but the truce lasted only hours.
excision of appropriations riders that trespass on the president 's duties and prerogative under article ii would be different from the line-item veto.
salt is also crucial to the food industry.
the scene in an examination hall is just a medley of reactions.
whether an empty value may be entered in this field.
has gone away.
unable to find a solution to apply.
similarly, the number of countries with isd telephone connection increased from 38 in january 1991 to 50 in january 1992.
industrie confidential.
unsharp mask.
no suggested words.
dialogs.
the government established a citizen's investment fund, introduced wealth tax and made efforts to redue the budgetary deficit.
conflicting options are present windows of workspace should be listed, but has been used.
license.
hobbies and interests.
show image size.
mark auto.
edit menus.
special character inside a string.
montague.
a few such as giant merrill lynch & co. now refuse even to do index arbitrage trades for clients.
moreover, since the immediate as well as longterm effects of a project of such a great magnitude were not take into full consideration, the terai region has now had to bear the brunt of the natural as well as ma nmade disasters like drought and floods due to excessive migration, haphazard human settlements and the degradation of the churiya region and the charkoshe jhari the forest belt of the terai, once acclaimed as the treasure house of forest resources.
the package cache is not available unable to download and install packages.
mineral oils : the items under mineral oils are petrol, diesel, kerosene oil, aviation fuel, light diesel oil, furnace oil, l.p.
in its construction spending report the commerce department said residential construction which accounts for nearly half of all construction spending was off 0.9  in september to an annual rate of $ 191.9 billion.
resizable.
these fiscal pressures are also a factor in shaping the poland package and while more ambitious authorizing legislation is still pending the appropriations bill in conference will be more decisive on u.s. aid to eastern europe.
an organizer must be set.
is a recursive symbolic link.
many projects were not justifiable from economic and social points of views.
list list channels on this network.
diagram properties.
the shard of deficit fincance is expected, especially in 1990/91, to be 1.0 percent at current prices and 0.6 percent of gdp at constant prices, and thus the share of the same in internal resource mobilisation is estimated to be only 22.1 percent.
at the board of trade yesterday the price of the corn contract for december delivery slipped 3.5 cents a bushel to settle at $ 2.375 a bushel.
revert to the original image.
bad namespace prefix.
attachment.
unable to open external link.
quarter moon.
use notification sounds.
this message is not currently available.
tileable.
namespace.
this diagram uses the state object for initial/final states. that option will go away in future versions. please use the initial/final state object instead.
yet this woman marie-louise giraud carries historical significance both as one of the last women to be executed in france and as a symbol of the vichy government 's hypocrisy.
send email message to mailing list?
program trading is  a racket  complains edward egnuss a white plains n.y. investor and electronics sales executive  and it 's not to the benefit of the small investor that 's for sure.
annapolis.
ratio.
update interval in seconds.
translational energy.
cancel group change?
she believes that the only answer for individuals is to  buy stocks that 'll weather any storm.
not active.
copy.
the number of mines in a custom game.
in fy 1974/75 there was a total of 28 air fields, all over the kingdom with 4 metalled, 12 fair eather and 12 small airstrips.
home fax.
the destination folder is inside the source folder.
failed to load source.
image saved to.
in the process, it will find new applications.
robinson.
rightpointing arrow.
comodoro rivadavia.
whether the input focus is within this gtkwindow.
assign color.
black pullout.
show a tooltip when the pointer hovers over an item.
it may be the nearness to one's office of work, school, traffic centers and so on.
languages table.
abuse of alcohol, tobacco, drugs and sex carries with it automatic retribution.
invalid server.
user's manual.
without admitting or denying wrongdoing they consented to findings that they had inaccurately represented the firm 's net capital maintained inaccurate books and records and made other violations.
wrap lines.
the eight h plan policies have been so formulated that they will promote the sustainable growth of large as well as cottage industries.
utf8,current.
but she believes that  program trading creates deviant swings.
there was an error launching the application.
the show did n't give the particulars of mrs. yeargin 's offense saying only that she helped students do better on the test.
have you read the help file?
alignment.
volume down.
description.
lady jane.
invalid formatted gflare file.
music.
perhaps he is willing to sacrifice to the arbitrage trader some small profit in order to get quick and certain execution of his large trade.
paste height.
recipients.
remada.
dialogs are treated as regular windows.
haze.
video tip : before seeing  sidewalk stories  take a look at  city lights  chaplin 's tramp at his finest.
path to selection add subtract intersect.
plus or minus.
start server.
pretend that the size and position of the tile are the same as the last time you tiled it if any, instead of using the current size.
while sipping a beer after practice he vividly recounts getting the red sox's carl yastrzemski to pop out to end the 1975 world series and repeating the feat against the yankees' roy white in 1976.
error loading defaultsnot a dia diagram file.
grid units.
aspect.
show scale options.
previously watch imports were denied *-37 such duty-free treatment.
bankers acceptances : 8.49  30 days ; 8.44  60 days ; 8.27  90 days ; 8.12  120 days ; 8.05  150 days ; 7.98  180 days.
connecting.
do you want to add this buddy to your buddy list?
snap.
file transfer complete.
the queen of clubs.
an unsupported action was attempted.
interpolation.
as a result of the continuing heavy dependence of gross domestic production on water conditions, the trends of annual fluctuations in economic growth rate persisted.
verify.
mother made me take off my wet clothes and take a warm shower.
skip to a specific time.
type.
that got hard to take  he added.
ralston attributed its fourth-quarter slump partly to higher costs of ingredients in the pet food business as well as competitive pressures which required higher advertising spending.
server couldn't resolve the address '.
david dinkins failed to file his income taxes for four straight years  says a disembodied male voice.
default icon zoom level.
unable to fstat source file.
your $ 15,000 will help keep a needy savings and loan solvent and out of the federal budget deficit.
no paths to reverse in the selection.
yazd.
node edit.
method did not start correctly.
accessible value.
there are different outfits for different hours of the day.
altogether nbi said it will eliminate 266 jobs at its boulder headquarters 176 field sales jobs and 50 jobs at its canadian and united kingdom headquarters.
to increase agricultural production using appropriate irrigation technologies suited to varying geophysical and climatic conditions of the country and that cause minimum negative impact on the environment.
tarbes.
that's because the male part the tassel and the female the ear are some distance apart on the corn plant.
total dependencies.
unable to run callback. the corresponding plugin may have crashed.
relative to.
many of the morning-session winners turned out to be losers by afternoon.
open.
header font for printing.
a drunken car driver may kill or maim.
tools.
in using program trading as a whipping boy fundamentalist investors stand to gain the high ground in wooing small investors for their existing stock-selection products.
williston.
when he sent letters offering 1,250 retired major leaguers the chance of another season 730 responded.
procedure returned a wrong value type for return valueexpected got.
tactical satellite communications terminal.
drag or double click to create a gradient on selected objects, drag handles to adjust gradients.
bad argument to system call.
man is now the master on land, on sea and in air.
paper type.
at present there is a world trade recession.
inactive.
both indicators were viewed as signs that the nation 's industrial sector is growing very slowly if at all.
atlantic/madeira.
digital camera.
air exhaust orifice.
invalid nickname.
packages to be installed these packages have been manually selected for installation on your computer.
delete all selected items permanently.
europe/istanbul.
ignore.
cancel.
name of default font to use.
tin city.
if true, scroll the background image with the foreground text if false, keep the image in a fixed position and scroll the text above it.
shearing.
failed to load file.
title x funds are the single largest source of federal funding for family-planning services according to the opinion by the second u.s. circuit court of appeals in new york.
add anchor.
failed to load theme.
during the same period, 204 m. tons of medicinal herbs also is expected to have been  processed.
the object you dropped cannot fit into its parent. either expand the parent object, or drop the object elsewhere.
when demand is stronger than suppliers can handle and delivery times lengthen prices tend to rise.
tank with fixed roof.
couldn't open for reading.
he said that if and when safety problems were identified they were corrected.
its fanciful offices were designed by architect julia morgan who built the hearst castle at san simeon.
has frame.
september 31, 1999.
during this period, the average annual growth in gdp was 3.4 precent whereas the growth in per capita income was a mere 0.8 percent.
digital imaging and communications in medicine image.
ignoring schema name ', invalid.
two suits.
pressure to succeed in examinations may also be detrimental to the students.
save all.
waseca.
squares.
delete selected contacts.
but this case is a stark lesson in how the failures of the traditional policy-making process have left the courts as the only forum this country has to debate risk technology and innovation.
the colours and shapes of elegant clothes are compliments to human ingenuity.
filename must end with.
chatty.
sea containers a hamilton bermuda-based shipping concern said tuesday that it would sell $ 1.1 billion of assets and use some of the proceeds to buy about 50  of its common shares for $ 70 apiece.
networkmanager applet.
rename.
whether the common prefix should be inserted automatically.
federal home loan mortgage corp freddie mac : posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days.
isometric.
no more list items.
display information about plugins.
adjust the luminosity threshold.
unable to add.
cursor line aspect ratio.
failed to preconfigure, with exit status.
go to first page.
excessive control and regulation the controloriented development approach of the past created many problems.
integer value for out of range.
editable mode of the cellrenderer.
it may very well be what the japanese banks want  he told radio new zealand.
resources.
the school-student ration and the teacher-student ration reached 1:98 and 1:29, as the numbers of enrolled students, school and teacher increased to 381,000, 4,092 and 13,207 respectively by mid april 1991.
volcanic ash.
repeat the last search in the opposite direction.
options to list windows or workspaces.
documenter entry.
no information.
print the image.
converting to indexed colors.
scale hue by.
move to another workspace.
connection timeout.
files.
when two parties engage in an interest-rate swap they are betting against each other on future rates.
the receptivity's font.
chapter menu.
too many values in file details field ' compared to others.
go to file “”.
couldn't open for writing.
objects to design simple lighting plots.
as nepal is a severely resource constrained country, it would not be an exaggeration to state that the development process can not be further advanced without foreign assistance.
files.
value invert.
laws and regulations r elating to registration and the structure of non-governmental organizations will be simplified and in order to make them capable of mobilizing internal resources to a greater extent, necessary improvements will be made in the legal provisions concerning taxation.
gromit annotations.
so did the federal reserve board 's industrial-production index.
blanked concave.
however, while there is a regular complaint from people concerning the unavailability searcity of medcines and manpower in hospitals and health ectres, the burden of the increasing population on exerting a heavy pressure on social services, and this population growth has minimized the impact of development achievements.
on screen window manager.
unable to correct dependencies, some packages cannot be installed.
saint john.
open file and close window.
decorah.
despite the insignificant success in the realization of principal in comparison to credit extension, the loan realization has increased at 16.8 percent per annum during this period.
information technology will change the way we think, act, educate, and associate.
liaoning.
playing.
elliot lake.
this document is locked and can only be read by entering the correct password.
american express also represents the upscale image  we 're trying to project  she adds.
while std and isd facilities were available at 62 places on 50 districts until january 1991, these service were made available at 69 places in 55 districts by january 1992.
the gtkiconsize value that specifies the size of the rendered icon.
filled diamond.
give up and quit the program.
one yen is not ethical  michio sasaki an official at keidanren the japan federation of economic organizations said.
abbreviation.
reply to all.
although the country is well endowed with abundant biomass and hydropower resources, the pace of industrialization is felt to have slowed down in the recent year mainly because of the lack of energy and power.
other, private use.
right margin.
heilongjiang.
thus, as a result of the increased flow of external loans and capital and capital and miscellaneous capital (net), there has been an increase in the balance of payments surplus this year also in spite of the considerable increase in trade deficit and current account deficit.
use driver update disc.
available versions of.
bottom edge.
speak indentation and justification.
couldn't read list of package sources.
recommended packages.
the size of the file.
a high standard of personal morality and unselfishness is cultured man's first characteristic.
the energy segment with a 15  rise in operating profit is clearly the company 's strongest.
messages.
northeast said it would refile its request and still hopes for an expedited review by the ferc so that it could complete the purchase by next summer if its bid is the one approved by the bankruptcy court.
america/edmonton.
gimp is brought to you by.
search paths, lines, polylines.
enable search.
member since.
there have also been cases of the collapse of dams due to inadequate strength and imperfect design.
cannot send a file of 0 bytes.
c source code header.
enter your own password.
show selection cue.
write error occurred.
he said u.s. assistance should be used to demobilize the rebels.
pacific/pitcairn.
in fy 1974/75, the country had 1,006 post offices.
jaguar officials in the u.s. noted that ford as jaguar 's largest shareholder now has the power to call for such a meeting.
some of the game's reigning philosophers dislike the idea of middle-aged men attempting a young man's sport.
problem syncing the file.
payouts on the s&p 500 stocks rose 10  in 1988 according to standard & poor 's corp. and wall street estimates for 1989 growth are generally between 9  and 14.
dash pattern used to draw the focus indicator.
the level of total expenditure in gross domestic product was at 5 percent in 1964/65, which reached 22 percent in 1989/90.
the personal antics of agency director amadou-mahtar m'bow drew much attention such as when several of his top aides were uncovered as kgb plants and ejected from france and when a mysterious office fire was set just before congress sent accountants to trace u.s. funds.
most civilized countries today are governed democratically rather than autocratically.
vermont.
some of the homeless obviously had pre-existing mental illness or addiction.
the screen on which to display the prompt.
cursor blink time.
variable transparency for the buddy list and conversations.
plugins.
integer value out of range.
the sector lacked dynamism and was unable to establish the kind of growth which induces forward and backward linkages with other sectors of the economy.
cannot add a contact to the same folder twice.
thus, as a result of the increased flow of external loans and capital and capital and miscellaneous capital net, there has been an increase in the balance of payments surplus this year also in spite of the considerable increase in trade deficit and current account deficit.
binary number.
photocopy.
media change please insert the disc labeled in the drive and press enter.
we either have to move ourselves to things or have things moved to us.
reserve left.
allow to contact you?
arkansas.
bad ticket.
print all subdirectories in a directory.
tibetan.
in business, communication is vital between a management and the employees.
create a symbolic link for each selected item.
various studies have been conducted for the purpose of quantifying the people living below the poverty line in nepal.
that is just a tad below the average of the past 40 years or so he says.
could not release screen on display.
integer.
reliance on foreign assistance without any concrete plan and without paying due attention to the optimum utilization of the assistance during the thirty years of the panchayat regime has given rise to many undesirable consequences placing the country unde3r the burden of foreign debts.
adding blinds.
delete message.
do you want to locally synchronize the folders that are marked for offline usage?
attribute value.
select colors from a swatches palette.
couldn't send password to mount process.
add segment.
scroll by.
while in the beginning the kathmandu valley alone was the centre of attraction, a substantial increase in the number of tourists took place during this period due to the extension of trekking, mountaineering, national parks and other places of touristic attraftion outside the valley.
pick the total accumulated opacity.
how long to accelerate in milliseconds.
arrange selected objects.
nemerle.
makkovik.
destination/prefix.
while forest development works in the hill and terai were being undertaken through a total of 22 forest divisions and 7 circle offices in 1965, forest offices in all the 75 districts, regional offices in all the regions and more than 200 ranger offices were set up by the year 1990.
in order to effectively and appropriately implement the above mentioned policies, it is necessary to increase the workefficiency of the government administrative machinery and to achieve the active participation of the private sector.
all the  sogo-shosha  are looking for new business  says arthur klauser adviser to the president of mitsui u.s.a. using the japanese term for the largest of the global trading houses.
demand from europe and southeast asia also grew but due to increasing production at local plants overseas sales edged down 2.8.
the following packages are suggested but will not be installed.
similarly, the deficit with india and other countries in 1991/92 stood at rs. 10,247 million and rs. 8,764.9 million respectively.
grab the whole screen.
business application.
name of theme rc file to load.
memory volume.
teachers have a very stressful job, keeping a classroom of children in the seats for a whole school day.
the japanese retort that the first round was too early to make concessions.
this task sets up your system to be a print server.
password.
appointments and meetings.
as more managers pursue the index-arbitrage strategy these small opportunities between markets will be reduced and eventually eliminated.
element is not allowed inside a draw operation element.
the angle span of the first brush to create.
rutland.
gimp brush.
define.
horizontal parallelogram.
keyboard shortcut to make font smaller.
this tool's own style.
its plans to be acquired dashed comprehensive care corp. said it plans to sell most of its psychiatric and drug abuse facilities in california and some other assets to pay its debt and provide working capital.
in 1991/92, the development expenditure is expected to decrease, according to the revised estimate, by 6.5 percent to reach rs. 14945.7 million.
send notice.
enter the addresses that will receive a carbon copy of the message.
enhances.
this has weakened the stability of the economy.
anniversary.
europe/warsaw.
cartoonist garry trudeau is suing the writers guild of america east for $ 11 million alleging it mounted a  campaign to harass and punish  him for crossing a screenwriters ' picket line.
invert selection unselect what is selected and select everything else.
feather.
oil production from australia 's bass strait fields will be raised by 11,000 barrels a day to about 321,000 barrels with the launch of the whiting field the first of five small fields scheduled to be brought into production before the end of 1990.
python console.
it has two limitations.
he told reporters in wellington tuesday that the government hadn't guaranteed the loans to dfc new zealand ltd. an investment bank 80%-owned by the national provident fund and wouldn't bail it out.
failed to open.
encrypted message.
invalid shadow password file entry.
europe/monaco.
in some cases the irs asked for information dating back to forms it received in 1985.
today is the debut of the senior professional baseball association a new eight-team pro sports circuit modeled after the highly successful senior tennis and golf tours and complete with good salaries a cable television contract and even expansion plans.
packages need to be removed but remove is disabled.
illesheim.
toggles whether the replyto field is displayed.
by constantly seeking to own the cheapest widget index-arbitrage traders hope to add between 1  and 3  to the annual return of the s&p 500.
unexpected server response from head.
strikethrough.
execute a custom command and put its output in a new document.
mr. baum said he and mr. harper both advocated closing some plants as long ago as early 1988.
contents.
print the list of tasks.
opentype font.
fourth series serial bonds are priced at par to yield from 6.25  in 1992 to 7  in 1999.
rating.
i grabbed my towel and headed for the bathroom.
horizontally aligned capacitor.
use info window.
if congress takes the dispute to the supreme court assuming it can establish standing to sue president bush might win.
obsoletes.
you have certificates on file that identify these people.
bhuj.
yellow.
collapse all threads.
dark color scheme using the tango color palette.
stop showing the desktop.
derive a smooth color palette from the image.
unable to add user to privacy list.
contents background color set.
stock id for a stock image to display.
appears to be offline and did not receive the message that you just sent.
navy.
the rest were history sociology finance subjects they never had.
rice lake.
whether the action group is visible.
maximal position.
frame geometry does not specify dimension.
appear offline.
end event  compensation.
traditional clock.
zoom in.
previous.
point light.
ulanude.
text to display.
srinagar.
alias pix image.
indirect command by hydraulic driver.
a low savings rate, the increased share of loan in forging assistance, low level of industrialization, weak agricultural production, limited export trade and a high population growth rate remained as barriers in the path of development.
error removing directory.
one is bound to sight a one-horned rhino or two at every elephant safari.
still some market analysts say the current 3.3  reading is n't as troublesome as it might have been in years past.
this growth rate is higher than that if the last three decades.
unity server.
turn the screensaver on blank the screen.
the perch and dolphin fields are expected to start producing early next year and the seahorse and tarwhine fields later next year.
randomize the color lightness by this percentage.
end of row.
commodore 64 audio.
maximize window horizontally.
indian/mahe.
the internal air service has been operated by nepal airlines corporation.
albums.
get public key.
contents.
straight up.
number of minutes that the typing break should last.
peopleâ€™s participation undoubtedly deserved a significant role in the decision making process but the periodic plant and the ever decreasing percentage of peopleâ€™s labour contribution in the panchayat sector clearly demonstrated the fact that the so called peopleâ€™s labour contribution was a mandatory obligation imposed on people for the programmes decided upon for them by others.
end the current game.
virtual alarm clock.
meanwhile the broad-based financial times 100-share index added 30.4 points to end at 2142.6 while reaching its minimum of 2120.5 a half hour into the session.
search.
enter new password for certificate database.
syntax error, command unrecognized.
places.
warning listtype can only be int, float, string or bool and not '.
apply to each object separately.
the sigils and smileys options in the config file are no longer used. please remove them.
create line.
show scrollbars.
like the dwelling place and the car, clothes too mark out a man's status.
reads the current value, or sets a new value.
save.
iran.
click to create a new component of the path.
powersaved negative output variable.
when test booklets were passed out 48 hours ahead of time she says she copied questions in the social studies section and gave the answers to students.
seven point star.
enter the filename to save.
unknown error numberlogging into the yahoo! website may fix this.
brightness of the color.
the communication sector was in fact stagnated as the media of communication were within the government control.
set foreground to the average color of the image border.
white level.
the visible impediments to economic growth such as natural constraints, preliminary stage of development efforts, low productivity, subsistence agricultural system and slackness in the expansion of nonagricultural sector are the major factors for a weak economic base.
monclova.
problem hashing file.
netranger.
long before 1960, railways and ropeways were established in nepal.
freezing drizzle.
temporary authentication failure.
châteauroux.
add buddy.
in this context, maintenance of regional balance forms another objective of he eighth plan.
similarly, in 1991.92 it was expected to accomplish tree plantation for soil conservation in 740 hectares, control of 34 gulleys, 83 numbers of landslide control activities, terrace rehabilitation in 239 hectares and protection of 61 water sources.
filter.
zoom out.
fractal trace.
discern.
drinking water programmes had been initiated especially in urban areas and some rural areas prior to 1960.
nouakchott.
custom.
reset sorting order and zoom level to match preferences for this view.
warning possible database corruption. will attempt to repair by adding back missing question.
the stock would be redeemed in five years subject to terms of the surviving company 's debt.
the following packages will be downgraded.
in national over-the-counter trading yesterday pop plunged $ 4 to $ 14.75.
it is “a day of victory over demons”.
create a clickable imagemap.
a company spokesman declined to elaborate on the departure.
uncheck this to use the bottom selected object as the clipping path or mask.
provincetown.
this message cannot be sent because the account you chose to send with is not enabled.
all files.
couldn't recognize the image file format for file.
set status.
replyto.
windows meta file.
conflicting options are present workspace should be interacted with, but has been used.
urbanization is a blessing in disguise.
mark, nonspacing.
merrill.
storage.
unexpected icon chunk in animation.
attribute value.
number of pixels of the entry scrolled off the screen to the left.
predefined process.
these enterprises suffered as a result of over staffing, political intervention, inefficiency and the lack of accountability.
the child pack direction of the menubar.
n the other hand, loands to the private sector gradually increased.
the share of food products and raw materials in the total export was 21.9 percent in fiscal year 1990/91 and 19.4 percent in fiscal year 1991/92.
a woman of a house has a much wider range of work to do than a man has.
bhopal.
cylinder radius.
detach.
targa image.
later from 1975 onwards it was felt that the foreign trade and the balance of payments situation needed to be coordinated with other aspects relation to monetary, fiscal, foreign exchange and production of the country and due attention should be paid to the close interrelations among them while formulating the economic policy.
text and font.
vertical scale per column in  of tile height.
british english.
simplified chinese.
add user id.
in the period between 1961/62 and 1989/90, some other small projects and big hydroelectric projects such as the panauti, trishuli, sunkosi, devighat, gandak, kulekhani and marsyangdi were commissioned.
objects to design sybase replication domain diagrams with.
inserts current date and time at the cursor position.
uberaba.
header 4.
previous.
ok? yes or no.
disable preview pane of mail, contacts and tasks.
trillian encryption.
invalid url.
this will also facilitate the evaluation of the impact on the economy of the growth of economic efficiency created by the sectoral policy measures such as appropriate regional allocation of resources, selection of suitable projects and monitoring system, prudent economic management, economic openness and privatization.
tile cache size.
the separate contracts were from paragould light & water commission a utility in paragould ark. and pse inc. a cogeneration-plant operator in houston.
end.
corporate lawyers said the new fees would n't inhibit many mergers or other transactions.
normal packages.
a spokesman for the irs confirmed that  there has been correspondence mailed about incomplete 8300s  but he declined to say why the letters were sent to lawyers now.
jilin.
radial gradient fill.
unable to remove the old temporary directory you should remove by hand.
root volume.
pacific/guam.
po box.
select whether to drag the cards or to click on the source then the destination.
mr. murray also said judge hampton 's comments did n't discredit the judiciary or the administration of justice.
did not understand pin type.
scale.
contact list.
options specifying the vertical behaviour of the child.
/options/show timestamps.
the present factory normally focuses on four fundament elements, namely man, material, machine and money.
although the size of negative savings is expected to reduce towards the end of the plan upon gradual improvements over the budgeting and accounting systems used in regular and development budgets, it will take a number of years to make the public sector capable of generating savings.
integra-a hotel & restaurant co. said its planned rights offering to raise about $ 9 million was declared effective and the company will begin mailing materials to shareholders at the end of this week.
revenue surplus during the period between 1972/73 and 1989/90 the revenue increased at the rate of 17.3 percent at current prices and 6.9 percent at constant prices.
epoch in version is not number.
cruzeiro do sul.
c source code.
storage solution engine.
mozambique.
once its ownership is finalized the new company will open talks with state-appointed receivers to buy or lease waertsilae marine 's shipyard facilities.
along with the note cray research is transferring about $ 53 million in assets primarily those related to the cray-3 development which has been a drain on cray research 's earnings.
reduction of regional imbalances a.
must specify keys to unapply schema from.
left paren.
while balance of payment surplus had increased by 7.5 timens in 1989/90 in comparison to 1974/75, trade deficit had increased by 14.3 times.
saturation characteristic.
edge label switch router.
join.
too few values in file details field ' compared to others.
ethernet interface.
expect  tricky  stuff from pitchers says mr. weaver the manager.
therefore, attention must be paid to the control of leakage and the purification if drinking water along with the extension of drinking water facilities.
bitmap size.
performs various artistic operations.
gas bottle.
dust whirls.
initially, the present government took steps to transform the controlled economy of the past thirty years into an open, liberal, transparent and competive market oriented economy.
your research stopped when a convenient assertion could be made.
fredericton.
in our society it is a common view that mothers take care of their babies.
by account.
cd digital audio.
it should be constantly stressed that poland 's farmers mostly need a real market for their products.
gunmen in lebanon assassinated a saudi arabian embassy employee and the pro-iranian islamic jihad took responsibility for the slaying to avenge the beheading of 16 terrorists by riyadh 's government in september.
letter, titlecase.
open failed.
evolution has found some keywords that suggest that this message should contain an attachment, but cannot find one.
you can not rotate the whole image if there's a floating selection.
the dropdown menu.
option takes a value.
foreign assistance due to limited internal revenue mobilistation, there was a growing reliance on foreign assistance for development expenditure.
local only.
save icon as.
random seed.
open preferences for the rectangle tool.
many a blind and hearing impaired persons have contributed tremendously to organizations they are attached to.
must specify some keys to break.
could not kill user.
sets how colors are converted from rgb working space to the print simulation device.
creating secure shell key.
however, these programmes were confined to mere slogans due to the lack of political commitment.
application.
the preview of a page in the document to be printed.
change to this.
therefore, during the eighth plan period, foreign assistance will be sought only for such priority projects which may not be sustained through internal resources and due attention will be paid to ensuring the maximum effectiveness in the utilization of the assistance.
by 1997 almost all remaining uses of cancer-causing asbestos will be outlawed.
america/grenada.
freeport-mcmoran energy partners will be liquidated and shares of the new company distributed to the partnership 's unitholders.
error reading justification.
recently drexel circulated a private financial statement among several securities firms showing that its earnings performance has diminished this year from previous years.
set account idle time.
certificate key usage.
check spelling.
type a new accelerator.
saudi arabia for its part has vowed to enact a copyright law compatible with international standards and to apply the law to computer software as well as to literary works mrs. hills said.
microsoft windows icon.
but a survey early this summer indicated that the volume of index-options trading was only 15  of the size of the underlying equity market exchange officials said.
fujian.
clear.
window role.
rotate / scale.
under two new features participants will be able to transfer money from the new funds to other investment funds or if their jobs are terminated receive cash from the funds.
standard & poor 's corp. lowered to double-c from triple-c the rating on about $ 130 million of debt.
folder.
integer number.
external data are again of two types (i) primary data (ii) secondary data.
briefs : only 57.6  of new yorkers watch the local news the lowest viewership in the country says a new study by impact resources inc. columbus ohio.
failed to store image.
air transport :  by 1990/91 and 1991/92 there were, including tribhuvan international airport, 43 air fields in the country of different capacities, serving 1 jet plane, 8 avro air planes, 30 twin otters and 4 pilatus porter.
display the next message.
a national campaign entitled "back to the village" was initiated with a view to providing a village -oriented philosophical base to the panchayat regime.
fixed height mode.
cannot convert fallback to codeset.
shuffle mode.
abortion ruling upheld : a federal appeals court upheld a lower court ruling that the u.s. can bar the use of federal funds for family-planning programs that include abortion-related services.
in london prices finished at intraday peaks comforted by a reassuring early performance on wall street and news that the british government will waive its  golden share  in auto maker jaguar.
email invitations will be sent to all participants and allow them to reply.
add exception.
color and transparency of the page background also used for bitmap export.
instead, as a longterm consequence, there emerged a situation after land reform where nepal, a major food exporter of south asia, turned into an importer of food grains and the situation accelerated the process if migration, too.
print server.
consequently, a system developed in which the center controlled the mechanism of regional development, which accorded a decisive role to the central development region creating an influx of a large population to it and making it the operationsite for the greatest number of development programmes.
pixbuf expander open.
file duration.
you ca n't hold back technology.
this instance only.
when referred to the questions that matched he said it was coincidental.
slides to illustrate shostakovich quartets ?
as nepali congress in committed to democratic socialism, the principal objective of the economic policy will be the amelioration of the standard of living of the deprived citizens through democratic processes.
durazno.
widget state.
borderaverage.
copy link address.
if you want to clone several objects, group them and clone the group.
create empty partition.
default value.
cancel any action on the selected package, and protect it from future upgrades.
the parishioners of st. michael and all angels stop to chat at the church door as members here always have.
export area.
integral symbol.
make selected segments curves.
replication server manager.
miyazaki.
background image.
left border.
additionally the end of the month position-squaring might have also played a minor role traders said.
the two concerns said they entered into a definitive merger agreement under which ratners will begin a tender offer for all of weisfield 's common shares for $ 57.50 each.
brush folders.
conflicts with.
known property value.
personal confidential.
similarly, an additional 48,337 ha has been developed during the two years interim period of fy 1990/1991 and 1991/1992.
layer name.
mr. butler will remain on the board as a nonexecutive director.
new instant message.
enable buddy icon animation.
only 26.8  in october compared with 28.5  in september and 26.8  in october 1988 said income would increase.
/buddies/add chat.
foreground stipple set.
extra space to put between the child and its upper and lower neighbors, in pixels.
move tab to the left.
copy selected messages to another folder.
speak blank lines.
manual page.
cooper tire & rubber co. said it has reached an agreement in principle to buy buildings and related property in albany ga. from bridgestone/firestone inc.
china pulled out of the program in july.
pause all.
message could not be sent because the user is offline.
expects uris or filenames to be passed as options.
error loading the help page.
font variant.
install the bootloader.
tonopah.
crestview.
world map.
website label.
unknown playlist.
the password is too weak.
minimized.
black light.
if this is set to false small images will not be stretched to fit into the screen initially.
buckland.
set default connection points distance.
diagram defaults.
operation not permitted.
disk usage analyzer.
select font folders.
warning failed to parse boolean value '.
president reagan learned that lesson.
existing problems:.
the last directory that an avatar image was chosen from.
tiling.
khartoum.
you have certificates from these organizations that identify you.
never.
by using them teachers with administrative blessing telegraph to students beforehand the precise areas on which a test will concentrate and sometimes give away a few exact questions and answers.
email invitations will be sent to all participants and allow them to accept this task.
font stretch as a pangostretch, e.g. pangostretchcondensed.
read error on standard input.
first color.
postscript document.
dialog frontend will not work on a dumb terminal, an emacs shell buffer, or without a controlling terminal.
she says she offered mrs. yeargin a quiet resignation and thought she could help save her teaching certificate.
previous.
moves flat review to the next item or word.
could not create a socket.
by 1989/90 the number of total air fields reached 43.
guthrie.
cannot allocate default font for printing.
themes.
in the absence of any political opposition, there did exist the opportunity of channeling the autocration character of panchayat to rapid economic development but, unfortunately, this also did not mathrialise.
distribute right edges of targets.
cinema has the ability to combine entertainment with communication of ideas.
additional efforts are required to develop the necessary infrastructure for tourism, which has evolved as a main source of foreign currency earnings, and the involvement of private sector in these efforts should be encouraged.
packages.
not loaded.
show grid.
but he has failed to gain any influence at the company.
create a new empty folder inside this folder.
at cray computer he will be paid $ 240,000.
i realized that, by this time, the motorcyclist would have gone far from that spot, with the lady's handbag.
encodings shown in menu.
torturetest an application by setting and unsetting a bunch of keys inside the directories on the command line.
load lighting preset.
bismarck.
shrink.
popup single match.
he has to do a job so as to take care of his family, his wife and kids.
so what is next for program trading ?
northwest territories.
david a. diloreto president of metal container division was named to the additional post of group vice president packaging products at this packaging industrial and aerospace products concern succeeding delmont a. davis who was named president and chief operating officer in august.
le lamentin.
archive had no package field.
change the name of the workspace to name.
toggle shaded state.
the 45-year-old mr. kuehn who has a background in crisis management succeeds alan d. rubendall 45.
linked.
without congressional action the treasury ca n't sell any new securities even savings bonds.
the list of sources could not be read.
function structure diagram objects.
if spreads available from index arbitrage are so enormous surely any sizable mutual-fund company could profit from offering it to small investors.
body font for printing.
sort direction the sort indicator should indicate.
failed to read the archive headers.
the pack direction of the menubar.
nintendo64 rom.
grain elevators built in the 1920s and '30s have six-inch concrete walls and a tubular shape that would easily contain semicircular cells with a control point in the middle the new york firm says.
antarctica/palmer.
humanreadable name of the profile.
if a competitor enters the game for example mr. hahn could face the dilemma of paying a premium for nekoosa or seeing the company fall into the arms of a rival.
similarly, tourism sector will be promoted in order to generate increased foreign exchange, employment and income.
europe/bratislava.
brightnesscontrast.
some fellow teachers however viewed mrs. yeargin as cocky and too yielding to students.
upper right.
show visual effects when no video is displayed.
sometimes the bribed became partners in the company.
minimum x.
remember password until you logout.
drag threshold.
pick the green component of the color.
ray shaw chairman of american city said he would assume mr. russell 's responsibilities if a successor is n't found this month.
scrolling.
you are not currently signed on with an account that can invite that buddy.
pacific sierra based in los angeles has about 200 employees and supplies professional services and advanced products to industry.
what is it? it's an elephant being eaten by a snake, of course.
not enough memory to load icon.
to open nonlocal files copy them to a local folder and then drop them again. the local files you dropped have already been opened.
bellevue.
a high-balance customer that banks pine for she did n't give much thought to the rates she was receiving nor to the fees she was paying.
notwithstanding the encouragement provided for the development of the industrial sector in the past, this sector remained in its rudimentary stage.
killeen.
image taking conditions.
only on this workspace.
dockable buddy list.
whether the widget is part of a composite widget.
failed to link gstreamer pipeline check your installation.
rendering fractal.
according to this methodology.
by tuesday night television stations were carrying new ads featuring mr. coleman himself raising questions about mr. wilder 's sensitivity to rape victims.
another is wrong judgment in crossing.
the king of clubs.
john leinonen executive engineer of ford motor co. 's auto-safety office said ford trucks have met car standards for roof-crush resistance since 1982.
spain 's vega secilia unico 1979 released only in its 10th year is $ 70 as is australia 's grange hermitage 1982.
popup list.
ratners 's chairman gerald ratner said the deal remains of  substantial benefit to ratners.
the bush administration 's nomination of clarence thomas to a seat on the federal appeals court here received a blow this week when the american bar association gave mr. thomas only a  qualified  rating rather than  well qualified.
can't find output format/filter.
line style properties.
in taiwan and south korea rising wages are forcing manufacturers to seek other overseas sites for labor-intensive production.
foreign assistance as a result of the steps taken by the government towards eliminating the level of disparity between foreign aid commitments and their utilization, the committed foreign aid during 1990.91 is expected to have been fully utilized nearly to the extent of hundred percent.
instead the companies will leave it up to the marketplace to decide.
click to add a memo.
thus, no specific progress was achieved in the development of other types of transport during this period.
a series of 5,000 or so changes is a  peal  and takes about three hours.
unknown argument '.
in september the department had said it will require trucks and minivans to be equipped with the same front-seat headrests that have long been required on passenger cars.
enable function keys? enter y or n.
estonia.
alert before ending or killing processes.
the name of the file with the graphics for the cards.
on the whole, the government policy could neither act as a catalyst nor contribute in leading the country towards industrialization.
examination results are the main criteria when selecting students for entrance into universities.
the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks.
warning the following essential packages will be removed. this should not be done unless you know exactly what you are doing!
project or system organisation.
we need to clarify what exactly is wrong with it.
but the broader nasdaq bank index which tracks thrift issues jumped 3.23 to 436.01.
horizontal alignment.
bucket fill.
neil kuvin the general manager of whas the cbs affiliate in louisville says  cosby  gets the station 's highest ratings and he 's  pleased.
cherokee.
but there have been problems with chemical sprays damaging plants' female reproductive organs and concern for the toxicity of such chemical sprays to humans animals and beneficial insects.
send to.
procedure browser.
deal a card.
program name as used by the window manager.
similarly, while the shares of export and import trade with india stood at 95.5 percent and 98.9 percent respectively in 1961/62, they gradually declined over the years to 12.7 percent and 25.2 percent respectively in 1980/90.
filename that should be displayed in the icon entry.
forward contact.
text alignment.
softwarebased router on file server.
there are variable views about the effects of cinema.
jbuilder project.
start in online mode.
cs first boston however benefits from the backing of its largest shareholder credit suisse switzerland 's third largest bank.
laughter is the best medicine.
the biggest challenge for the present government is to alleviate poverty from the rural sector.
powersaved 'reset' output variable.
trace trap.
montdemarsan.
comment.
fashion, too, should be promoted to enrich out life.
capture log messages.
readme document.
the country could not make qualitative advance in the field of education as a result of the new education system instead, there was further deteoriation.
enable networking.
asia/nicosia.
wedtech 's scammers simply bribed them to shut up.
cut the selection.
marham.
the water that was provided was also not available in required quantities.
during the same period, while the private sector loans increased by 21.3 percent, the government sector borrowing recorded a growth of 28.5 percent.
preparing to completely remove.
there are thousands of disabled people in asia and many face discrimination on a regular basis which takes many forms.
if i took -lcb- these preparation booklets -rcb- into my classroom i 'd have a hard time justifying to my students and parents that it was n't cheating  says john kaminski a traverse city mich. teacher who has studied test coaching.
error occurred while waiting for data on socket.
centri firewall.
some long-tenured employees will receive additional benefits the company said.
canton.
about this program.
the difficulties of changing the political and administrative structure were largely responsible.
desktop.
michigan.
get your binoculars and look forward to a rewarding experience.
pause.
but then came oct. 13 and the negative publicity orchestrated by the old guard particularly against index arbitrage.
georgia gulf added 1 3/4 to 51 1/4 after nl industries controlled by dallas investor harold simmons offered to acquire the stock it does n't already own for $ 50 a share.
leave fullscreen.
children are usually curious, joyful, and active by nature.
cannot execute.
plugins.
the file chooser dialog to use.
so, in conclusion, long holidays are beneficial for some people and not so good for others.
must specify a type when setting a value.
low pass filter.
auckland.
add key server.
spreading.
documents.
the company said it plans a fourth-quarter charge which it did n't specify for an early-retirement program.
show schema options.
koizumi sangyo corp japan  20 million swiss francs of 6 1/2  privately placed notes due nov. 29 1996 priced at 99 1/2 via dai-ichi kangyo bank schweiz.
password changed.
clickdrag to move the path around.
eject the volume associated with the open folder.
publish calendar information.
the disturbing thing about this abortion issue is that the debate has become polarized so that no mechanism exists  for finding a middle ground.
everybody and nobody.
black square.
drawing.
bookmarks.
pef program.
reset topic restriction.
but we are not going back to 1970.
says gayle key a mathematics teacher  the incentive pay thing has opened up a can of worms.
view certificate.
the recent rally in precious metals was a result of uncertainty and volatility in equities  he said.
strasbourg.
clermontferrand.
unreadable file.
quote.
empty variable name in environment file.
out of memory.
try again later.
enable echo by word? enter y or n.
conflicting options are present screen should be interacted with, but has been used.
for the same reason hearing is of nearly the same importance.
labeled argument.
it rose largely throughout the session after posting an intraday low of 2141.7 in the first 40 minutes of trading.
flash fired.
set to true to disable all external thumbnailer programs, independent on whether they are independently disabled/enabled.
allow completely transparent regions to be selected.
america/lapaz.
to promote export, arrangements have been made for free export of all commodities without licence requirements except for a few senstitive items.
unsupported icon type.
annotations and cross references.
do you really want to remove all keyboard shortcuts from all menus?
ballot questions range from a maine initiative on banning cruise missiles to a referendum on increasing the north dakota income tax.
window position.
invalid username or password.
missing.
the treasury plans to sell $ 30 billion in notes and bonds next week but will delay the auction unless congress quickly raises the debt ceiling.
similarly transportation for goods from one place to another becomes easier.
terminal server.
corporate issues ibm 's $ 750 million debenture offering dominated activity in the corporate debt market.
to achieve the above mentioned objective, this plan has called for the involvement of private sector and increased peopleâ€™s participation at the community level.
converting from to.
trying dir.
software author credits.
installed packages these packages are currently installed on your computer.
calendar file.
small hailstorm.
at night he returns to the condemned building he calls home.
this is japan ?
madagascar.
the buyers walk away and the specialist is left alone  as the buyer of last resort for his stable of stocks he contends.
waukesha.
click select drag move.
a new industrial policy has been formulated to intensify the pace of industrial development.
em squares.
while the foreign assistance contributed 37.4 percent of total development expenditure in 1972/73, the figure increased to 61.1 percent in 1989/90.
the thrift holding company said it expects to obtain regulatory approval and complete the transaction by year-end.
this task has been deleted.
import existing keys from a file.
devices.
the biggest challenge for the present government is to alleviate poverty from the rural sector.
unknown template field in stanza of.
wellsville.
a royal bengal tiger may surprise you by his majestic appearance.
gimp message.
gimp tip of the day.
vertical padding.
select in all layers.
one of the primary factiors for this was the inability to clearly establish inte4rrelationship among the goals and among the objectives, priorities, strategies and programmes of the plans.
letter, other.
mr. bromwich 35 also has served as deputy chief and chief of the narcotics unit for the u.s. attorney 's office for the southern district of new york based in manhattan.
your command failed for an unknown reason.
join whom in chat?
programs like section 8 a are a little like leaving gold in the street and then expressing surprise when thieves walk by to scoop it up.
all files.
toggles snaptogrid for this window.
play a sound.
select file.
connecting to.
slider length.
local delivery.
whatever may be the reason, cinema has occupied a major share of market for its cine lovers.
whether this tag affects the font style.
stock id not found.
zephyr protocol plugin.
rep. dingell of michigan plans to unveil today a proposal that would break with bush 's clean-air bill on the issue of emissions that lead to acid rain.
japan 's finance ministry already is scrutinizing institutional investors ' activity to see whether policy changes are needed to cope with the current level of program trading said makato utsumi vice minister for international finance.
left bracket.
whether to strike through the text.
rock hill.
unknown parent folder.
therefore, attention must be paid to the control of leakage and the purification if drinking water along with the extension of drinking water facilities.
add the current color to the color history.
burkina faso.
did not understand shadow for element.
axial ventilator.
characters drink salty dogs whistle  johnny b. goode  and watch bugs bunny reruns.
similarly, while the shares of export and import trade with india stood at 95.5 percent and 98.9 percent respectively in 1961/62, they gradually declined over the years to 12.7 percent and 25.2 percent respectively in 1980/90.
decrease tile opacity by this percentage for each column.
warning layer  selected more than once.
hex grid size.
macbinary file.
key type.
medical researchers believe the transplantation of small amounts of fetal tissue into humans could help treat juvenile diabetes and such degenerative diseases as alzheimer 's parkinson 's and huntington 's.
replace.
could not save configuration file.
europe/sofia.
failed to import paths from.
moves flat review to the beginning of the previous line.
play.
type a new shortcut.
bilinear.
one is trying to overtake and very often taking risk.
router and switch shapes by cisco.
saving remote files needs to determine the file format from the file extension. please enter a file extension that matches the selected file format or enter no file extension at all.
type of light source to apply.
music.
web cluster.
select desired speech server.
mr. sherwood speculated that the leeway that sea containers has means that temple would have to  substantially increase their bid if they 're going to top us.
under an accord signed yesterday the government and union bank of finland would become major shareholders in the new company each injecting 100 million finnish markkaa $ 23.5 million.
founded as the examiner in 1903 by mr. hearst the herald was crippled by a bitter decade-long strike that began in 1967 and cut circulation in half.
no signed data in signature.
profiling alarm clock.
status.
jackson diagram.
this has, on the one hand, exerted heavy pressure on drinking water supply system, education health care and transports and also led to greater pollution in urban area, while on the other, the economic and social conditions in the rural areas have further worsened.
drawing interchange file.
he tries to give as much time to his kids as possible.
track  audio recording.
earnings at xerox 's financial-services operations actually rose slightly but that was largely because capital gains at crum & forster offset hurricane hugo payments and the reserves set up to cover future payments.
event information.
determines how the shadowed box around the viewport is drawn.
maximum height.
failed to retrieve message.
america/dawson.
end event.
shrink.
hide toolbar.
a telephone-information operator had no listing for either party.
compasslike display of angles.
always sign outgoing messages when using this account.
those countries including japan italy canada greece and spain are still of some concern to the u.s. but are deemed to pose less-serious problems for american patent and copyright owners than those on the  priority  list.
america/antigua.
chronogram.
enter choice.
add another control stop to gradient.
family planning programme was launched as a national programme only from fy 1965/66 through the government and non government associations and institutions while maternity child health programe was initiated around fy 1973/74 only.
plot a graph of the settings.
view the detailed program manual.
friends of gnome.
imply resource not shown downstairs.
busy.
in a victory for environmentalists hungary 's parliament terminated a multibillion-dollar river danube dam being built by austrian firms.
the four of clubs.
klagenfurt.
callmanager.
disconnect.
help system.
-rrb- for some players the lure is money up to $ 15,000 a month.
specify the schema name followed by the key to apply the schema name to.
falling back to frontend.
pointer to local file  valid at site.
libya.
he says campbell was n't even contacted by the magazine for the opportunity to comment.
unable to update attendee.
at least.
as shown in table 6, the negative savings during the eighth plan will be, more or less, equivalent to 34.5 percent of the gross fixed capital investment of the public sector.
vertical limiting line.
invalid home directory.
server response contained incomplete authorization data.
definition list.
the road was constructed over 40 years ago.
more than one user was found with the same public key. select the correct user from the list to add to the buddy list.
characters that are considered "part of a word".
thus, it is necessary to provide relief to the people by cutting down the rate of increase in prices.
some democrats led by rep. jack brooks d. texas unsuccessfully opposed the measure because they fear that the fees may not fully make up for the budget cuts.
you cannot foretell it.
the permissions of the selected file could not be determined.
america/montreal.
new orleans.
make above.
ï»¿irrigation introduction irrigation plays a key role in the development of agricultural sector which has remained the backbone of the country's economy.
portable players  mtp.
for the agency for international development appropriators approved $ 200 million in secondary loan guarantees under an expanded trade credit insurance program and total loan guarantees for the overseas private investment corp. are increased by $ 40 million over fiscal 1989 as part of the same poland package.
disable sound server usage.
writing extended state information.
the board height must be a positive integer.
analysts said mr. stronach wants to resume a more influential role in running the company.
add guide.
has returned from being away.
dots.
this story line might resonate more strongly if mr. lane had as strong a presence in front of the camera as he does behind it.
depthmerging.
could not fork.
odd-year elections attract relatively few ballot issues.
user window manager deprecated.
prior to his term a teacher bled to death in the halls stabbed by a student.
the governor could n't make it so the lieutenant governor welcomed the special guests.
america/tegucigalpa.
evidence of widespread cheating has surfaced in several states in the last year or so.
height of the window.
during these years also, foreign grants and loans played a major role in maintaining a favourable balance of payments situation.
they are n't really a thrift  says jonathan gray a sanford c. bernstein analyst.
show comments.
dialog box.
verifying server public key.
georgia gulf stock rose $ 1.75 a share yesterday to close at $ 51.25 a share while nl shares closed unchanged at $ 22.75 and valhi rose 62.5 cents to $ 15 all in new york stock exchange composite trading.
in the first three months of 1990 the treasury estimates that it will have to raise between $ 45 billion and $ 50 billion assuming that it decides to aim for a $ 10 billion cash balance at the end of march.
problem unlinking.
after trading at an average discount of more than 20  in late 1987 and part of last year country funds currently trade at an average premium of 6.
maximum distance allowed between two clicks for them to be considered a double click in pixels.
shuffle mode.
africa/monrovia.
alphaweighting.
vertical tab border.
launch help browser.
both funds are expected to begin operation around march 1 subject to securities and exchange commission approval.
stay unmoved.
searching.
horizontally aligned pump.
waiting for disc.
would you like to send a cancelation notice for this memo?
that is how the thundering clouds deafen people when the thunder reaches the earth.
because of the gifts of nature, it is in tourism that nepal can gain comparative advantages.
sense.
in his return toast to mr. nixon mr. yang said the relationship had reached a  stalemate.
description.
c source code.
the immense growth in nonfood products and services accompanied by the increas e in food and beverage products in 1991/92 caused the price level reach extremely high during this period.
it 's now a very good time politically to get this over and done with  observed daniel jones professor of motor industry management at the university of cardiff in wales.
ixtapa.
don't understand type '.
similarly, the policies of loan disbursement by commercial banks in productive, priorityaccorded sectors need to be intensified so as to gradually alleviate poverty through the creation of new employment opportunities for the economic upliftment of the low income rural population.
it is clear that most mentally ill people and most alcoholics do not become homeless.
could not parse color.
nothing selected.
arguments not in pairs.
kapuskasing.
biddable.
create multiple clones of selected object, arranging them into a pattern or scattering.
current line.
move the active layer.
confirm image size.
unknown color.
select the documents you want to save.
paste size separately.
in the fiscal year f.y. 1990/91 at f.y. 1974.75 constant prices, the shares of an agricultural and non agricultural sectors in gross domestic product were respectively 59.4 percent and 42.1 percent, which are expected to be 57.9 percent and 42.1 percent respectively in f.y. 1991/92.
stock id.
add connect to server mount.
among other winners wednesday was nippon shokubai which was up 80 at 2,410.
spacing.
convert to grayscale.
the principal reason behind the fall in current account deficit was the slackness experienced in the increase of trade deficit.
end markers.
read.
sets the folder for temporary storage. files will appear here during the course of running gimp. most files will disappear when gimp exits, but some files are likely to remain, so it is best if this folder not be one that is shared by other users.
contributors.
hyphen bullet.
vertical shift per column in  of tile height.
africa/ouagadougou.
and so, it becomes increasingly important to know about other countries, other people.
sleep.
for american express the promotion is part of an effort to broaden the use of its card for retail sales where the company expects to get much of the future growth in its card business.
open scripts folder.
the strokes are evenly distributed across the image.
procedure returned an invalid id for argumentmost likely a plugin is trying to work on an image that doesn't exist any longer.
science has become our greatest enemy.
to open nonlocal files copy them to a local folder and then drop them again.
offset layer.
edit port declaration.
rhythmbox.
roll up.
with a view to strengthening the internal air service, permission was granted to private sector to operate domestic flights.
close conversation.
the principal role of the government will be to develop physical infrastructure necessary for economic development, such as roads and communications, to bring the people so far left out into the mainstream of development, by providing basic social services such as health care, education and drinking water, essential to the longterm national development, the participation of the private sector in these areas, too, will be welcomed, the government will initiate a process of disengagement and disinvestment from a number of areas that may be managed more efficiently by the private sector without jeopardizing social interests.
luminosity phaseshift.
error while applying stylesheet.
chair persons.
empty all trash folders when exiting evolution.
limit to.
plugin crashed  the dying plugin may have messed up gimp's internal state. you may want to save your images and restart gimp to be on the safe side.
the internal revenue service has threatened criminal sanctions against lawyers who fail to report detailed information about clients who pay them more than $ 10,000 in cash.
configuration server couldn't be contacted.
start event.
buick has been seeking for the past few years to restore its reputation as  the doctor 's car  a product for upscale professionals.
blue threshold.
block type reference.
gilmer.
number of pixels in the right margin.
hold the maximal channels.
set up new device….
in order the achieve the targeted value added growth rate in the eighth plan period, a 5.1 percent growth rate in the gross domestic product will be achieved by means of a 3.7 percent increase in agricultural value added and a 6.1 percent increase in nonagricultural value added.
file not found.
invalid shell.
a lack of enthusiasm with the latest economic data hampered the stock market 's bid to extend tuesday 's sharp gains as prices closed slightly higher in sluggish trading.
freeport-mcmoran inc. said it will convert its freeport-mcmoran energy partners ltd. partnership into a publicly traded company through the exchange of units of the partnership for common shares.
the students pass the valuable lime of their life in school.
kristianstad.
over the summer months there has been a slowing in the rate of new orders from the computer sector our primary market  said wilfred j. corrigan chairman and chief executive officer.
polar coordinates.
clarinda.
draw destruction mark.
edit.
gammacorrect.
the review also showed that while the increase in money supply in the initial years was mainly caused by foreign assets, the same in the subsequent years was caused by excessive internal borrowings.
the approach to the eighth plan was prepared accordingly.
stocks closed higher in hong kong manila singapore sydney and wellington but were lower in seoul.
comment.
kumamoto.
in the outfield paul blair the orioles' eight-time gold glove winner elegantly shags a fly.
constructors.
invalid file name.
but robert gabele president of invest-net a north miami fla. company that packages and sells the insider-trading data said the proposal is worded so vaguely that key officials may fail to file the reports.
my elder brother asked me if i wanted to join him for a jog around the neighborhood and i agreed.
superscript a.
devices.
support for mtp devices show the content, transfer, play from device.
plural.
protected.
kazan'.
pick a font.
this was a closed economy concept, which disregards the analysis of interrelationships among diverse economic areas.
a pgp key allows you to encrypt email or files to other people.
the legislation itself noted that it was introduced  by request  and in 1983 mr. wilder introduced a bill to protect rape victims from unfounded interrogation.
filter.
the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks.
/sort objects/default/by type.
checking folder consistency.
child status has changed.
discrete blocks.
select everything.
canberra.
failed to fetch.
biskra.
parent.
are you sure you want to restore evolution from the selected backup file?
internal loans will primarily be arranged from private sector saving, which will facilitate the control of money supply and price level.
must specify a key or keys to get.
you must name this filter.
zoom ratio.
on the import front, the fiscal year 1990/91 recorded the total import of rs. 24,197.9 million, which reached rs. 32,951.3 million in fiscal year 1991/92.
fetching the room list failed.
selecting.
reload.
manta.
export bitmap.
walla walla.
more arrows.
svenska intecknings garanti aktiebolaget sweden  20 billion yen of 6  eurobonds due nov. 21 1994 priced at 101 3/4 to yield 6.03  less full fees via mitsui finance international.
ellipsoidal reflector spotlight.
invite.
eat more often at home and cut down on eating out.
kérkyra.
resize text layer.
discos and private clubs are exempt from the ban and smoking will be permitted in bars except during meal hours an official said.
diaobject.
could not open file.
thus, the trade deficit which increased by 26.0 percent in 1990/92 declined to 14.6 percent in 1991/92.
despite the continued efforts to increase revenue and control regular expenditure, there was no marked increade in the revenue surplus because of a low collection of taxes particularly in 1990.91 and the pressure of the increased salary of civil servants on regular expenditure especially in the latter months of 1991/92.
grenoble.
sending message.
asia 's other cash-rich countries are following japan 's lead and pumping capital into the region.
in sometimes amusing more often supercilious even vicious passages mr. katzenstein describes how sony invades even the most mundane aspects of its workers ' lives at the regimented office where employees are assigned lunch partners and at  home  in the austere company dormitory run by a prying caretaker.
regulable valve, vertical.
installed.
rotation snaps every.
the differences in the shares of sectoral gross fixed investment in total development outlay are caused by the differences in the nature of the programmes proposed in various sectors.
show contact preview window.
clickdrag to replace the current selection.
transform.
leave the dependency "recommends " unresolved.
the mother teaches her child what to do and what not to do.
minor step line width.
a single author entry.
people generally do not like to listen to others.
reduce luminance.
regular expression.
in the year-ago quarter the company reported net income of $ 1.9 million or 29 cents a share.
in the year-earlier period sci had net income of $ 4.8 million or 23 cents a share on revenue of $ 225.6 million.
set layer boundary size.
not enough memory to load bitmap image.
bookmarks could not be saved.
a 1  to 2  return on $ 17 billion  ai n't hay  mr. klauser says.
connecting to music share.
marseille.
expires.
plasma.
in a meeting tuesday supreme leader deng xiaoping told mr. nixon  frankly speaking the u.s. was involved too deeply in the turmoil and counterrevolutionary rebellion which occurred in beijing not long ago.
alturas.
london shares finished moderately higher.
guideline.
the ad prompted mr. coleman the former virginia attorney general to launch a series of advertisements created by bob goodman and designed to shake mr. wilder 's support among the very women who were attracted by the abortion ad.
another was nancy yeargin who came to greenville in 1985 full of the energy and ambitions that reformers wanted to reward.
send a mobile message.
you are required to change your password immediately password aged.
the lack of qualitative development in education is the main reason for this situation.
similarly, the area, the production rate and the productivity rate of cash crops increased by 1.8 percent, 5.1 percent and 3.3 percent respectively over the period.
default frame delay.
nonproxy hosts.
a stadium craze is sweeping the country.
lower to bottom.
digits.
search for a key, recursively.
anaktuvuk pass.
cell size.
dsssl document.
although the panchayat regime had also made provisions for decentralization, it was not implemented effectively.
gardermoen.
this programme took a vow to fulfil the basic minimum needs such as foodgrains, clothing, housing, health, education and public security among others and raise the economic condition of the people to the asian standard by 2000.
troubled nbi inc. said it fired more than half its work force and is discontinuing its hardware business *-1 to focus on its software and service operations.
palette name.
from italy there is angelo gaja barbaresco at $ 125 a bottle piero antinori 's la solaia a $ 90 cabernet from tuscany and biondi-santi brunello at $ 98.
at the same time you 'll give your foster savings institution the gift of hope and freedom from the federal regulators who want to close its doors for good.
bold set.
mitsubishi 's investment in free state is  very small  less than $ 4 million  mr. wakui says.
at the end of the delay, click in a window to snap it.
fort worth.
whether the column can be reordered around the headers.
screen on display already has a window manager try using the replace option to replace the current window manager.
cool link 2.
sets the level of interpolation used for scaling and other transformations.
the following will be undertaken to this end.
default reply style.
one an average, the item deposits increased by 24.7 percent per annum and the incre ased in net capital and other liabilities was 35.2 percent.
however after two meetings with the soviets a state department spokesman said that it 's  too early to say  whether that will happen.
sort.
are unlinked.
memory maps.
transparent background.
find rooms.
number of the workspace to examine or modify.
not a symbolic link.
he said that firms could get around the collar by executing trades manually.
mouse gestures configuration.
economists say a buildup in inventories can provoke cutbacks in production that can lead to a recession.
the idea of course : to prove to 125 corporate decision makers that the buckle on the rust belt is n't so rusty after all that it 's a good place for a company to expand.
authors.
we thought it was awfully expensive  said sterling pratt wine director at schaefer 's in skokie ill. one of the top stores in suburban chicago  but there are people out there with very different opinions of value.
xml.
kenya.
during that period, the currency increased by 21.2 percent ad the current deposit by 9.9 percent.
at the weatherbeaten pompano beach municipal stadium mr. blair the 45-year-old former oriole knows his power isn't what it used to be.
in happier news south korea in establishing diplomatic ties with poland yesterday announced $ 450 million in loans to the financially strapped warsaw government.
volunteering also allows one to become more mature at a relatively younger age.
james mason assistant secretary for health said the ban on federal funding of fetal-tissue transplant research  should be continued indefinitely.
documents/word processor.
disk tests.
private pgp key.
among other things it included checking safe deposit box and credit card all for free plus a good deal on installment loans.
the new folder name is illegal.
industry, tourism and electricity 2.
my top rated.
but it said that severance payments to those executives not staying with the company will reduce first of america 's operating results for 1989 by $ 3 million to $ 4 million or 15 cents to 20 cents a share.
no keys usable for signing.
edit area info.
however, women are still lagging behind in developing countries.
no sensible file extension, attempting to load with file magic.
assuming it was n't one of those columns that you clipped and put on the refrigerator door i 'll review the facts.
konqueror.
only background.
couldn't find any package matchinghowever, the following packages contain in their description.
a structural analysis of the revenue reveals that it depended entirely upon traditional sources of revenue, as new revenue sources were not tapped.
anyone.
width of border around the main dialog area.
trying to clothe the variety o human appearance in uniform dress is going against the law of nature.
failed to link to.
in spite of the slogans of balanced development having been raised even during the panchayat regime, development efforts were comparatively concentrated in developed and urban areas, which gave rise to great social and economic disparities among the regions.
yukon territory.
a short name for the audio profile, to be used in selections and uniquely identifying the profile.
tribes dependent on land for grazing and agriculture lose their herds, flocks and food.
rivne.
sitting woman.
closed.
these courses will give them more ideas, skills and inspiration.
puerto cabezas.
generating message list.
display line numbers.
gimp brush animated.
error don't know how to export into.
starting with congressman mario biaggi now serving a jail sentence the company began a career of bribing federal state and local public officials and those close to public officials right up to and including e. robert wallach close friend and adviser to former attorney general ed meese.
log file to open up on startup.
preview widget.
add a mask to the layer.
select objects to move to the layer above.
the messages you have selected for follow up are listed below. please select a follow up action from the "flag" menu.
2 tourism : while 7,750 tourists came to nepal in f.y. 1961/62, this number reached 246, 361 in 1989/90 with its average annual growth rate of 13.1 percent.
in addition shearson 's listed $ 2 billion of capital is overstated according to the rating concerns because it includes $ 1.7 billion of goodwill.
it enables us to travel hundreds of miles in a few hours.
activate next document.
workarounds for broken applications disabled. some applications may not behave properly.
this has already led to some positive results.
deal more cards.
shear tool shear the layer, selection or path.
clickdrag to move the anchors around.
direct.
hidden.
as a foster corporate parent you 'll be helping a neighborhood s&l in areas crucial to its survival.
current gradient.
show general options.
no such channel.
new contact.
sun mulaw audio.
carpet.
the selected month as a number between 0 and 11.
low integrity.
the company recently said it would sell some operations and lay off 4  of its work force altogether reducing employment to less than 16,000 from about 18,000.
we have a long history of maintaining an open direct-investment policy  mr. dallara says.
conflicting actions  and.
in view of the heavy reliance on foreign assistance in the past, it was not possible to drastically reduce this dependence.
when declined.
when these things are denied then there can be a case for resistance, even revolution.
no "startangle" or "from" attribute on element.
prestwick.
make selected nodes smooth.
meters.
although the carpet and garment industries have re3corded a significant growth in export earnings over the recent years, in views of quality control, proper organizational structure, large scale production and innovations in the production patterns, it is necessary to improve the quality standards of the products for markets to which they have been usually exported.
the huntsville ala. electronic products maker said it expects to post a  significant  loss for its fiscal first quarter ended sept. 30.
mail checker.
for the year to date moody 's said total returns were topped by the 16.5  of longer-term treasury issues closely followed by 15  for investment-grade bonds.
man may not stop here too.
entering system maintenance mode.
last name.
error loading png file.
info.
contact the owner of the mailing list this message belongs to.
guaranteed by svenska handelsbanken.
a stockbroker is an example of a profession in trade and finance.
whether to ask for confirmation when deleting files, or emptying trash.
color enhance.
latin.
gimp startup.
working adults can also bring own food to work although this may not be a popular practice.
font weight as an integer, see predefined values in pangoweight for example, pangoweightbold.
a total of 1,993,000 kilo liters of petroleum products in estimated to be required during the eighth plan period.
february.
the offer valued at about $ 576 million for the 33  of telerate that dow jones does n't already own had been set to expire nov. 6.
italic set.
random pick.
group by box.
alien map.
if  a wild sheep chase  carries an implicit message for international relations it 's that the japanese are more like us than most of us think.
mirror the active curve to the other border.
warning options.
in view of the trade composition of the country, the industrial goods have, in comparison with food products and raw materials, started gaining dominant share in the country's export.
location server.
horizontal options.
consequently, the gap between revenue and expenditure reached as high as 12 percent from 3 percent.
/sort diagrams/default/as inserted.
puerto barrios.
you are required to change your password immediately root enforced.
select a flowed text to unflow it.
unable to fetch room list.
versions.
image spacing.
effect image.
could not lock  protocol error with lockhelper.
he will specialize in white-collar criminal defense work.
select certificate.
alpha channels.
unable to fetch file, server said.
create link.
but robert r. murray a special master appointed by the texas supreme court said judge hampton did n't breach any judicial standards of fairness although he did violate the state 's judicial code by commenting publicly on a pending case.
recently played.
therefore, this plan has accorded high priority to the creation of the entire infrastructure if rural development.
canary islands.
profit at least in the short term is usually a secondary goal.
quad arrow.
in san francisco its backers concede the ballpark is at best running even in the polls.
the three of diamonds.
punctuation, dash.
prompt while marking multiple messages.
at present, owing to the execessive liquidity in the economy, while the rate of consumption in increasing, the rate of savings in on the decline.
security enabled.
cut bank.
chair.
the soviet orders were compressed into the month of october because of delays.
specifies the number of spaces that should be displayed instead of tab characters.
style of bevel around the contents.
the nation faces the complex challenges of accelerating the economic development, alleviating poverty and reducing regional imbalances and raising the living standard if the people in a short period through and extensive increase in employment opportunities against the backdrop of the scarcity of means and resources.
calendar and tasks.
wrap width.
drexel burnham lambert analyst michael derchin said he sees a 70  chance that the parent of united airlines the target of a failed $ 300-a-share offer from a labor-management group will be acquired or restructured within six months.
fonts.
underline.
unable to find this memo in any memo list.
europe/gibraltar.
url that provides proxy configuration values.
this is especially beneficial for students.
user not in group.
proceeds of that sale are to be used to reduce debt and buy back shares.
the company also adopted an anti-takeover plan.
/tools/file transfers.
the judge declined to discuss his salary in detail but said :  i 'm going to be a high-priced lawyer.
resolution.
the issue will be swapped into fixed-rate u.s. dollars at a rate the company said is less than 9  ; a spokesman declined to elaborate.
a house-senate conference approved major portions of a package for more than $ 500 million in economic aid for poland that relies heavily on $ 240 million in credit and loan guarantees in fiscal 1990 in hopes of stimulating future trade and investment.
zanderij.
playing a movie.
? items.
nepal is a landlocked nation that geographically lies between india and china.
however, does the school examination system provide an accurate yardstick of the candidate's ability?
necessary procedures have also been initiated to privatize five agricultural farms in government sector.
regarding drinking water, thermajority of the countryâ€™s population is deprived of the ac cess to clean drinking water facility.
sort by size.
calculate.
brightness cutoff for black/white.
groupwise.
thus the band-wagon psychology of recent days picks up new impetus.
link here.
drawing interchange file import and export filters.
sand point.
contains illegal characters.
posting not allowed.
an added benefit of good reading is the development of a love of language for its own sake.
sterling was quoted at $ 1.5755 down from $ 1.5805 late tuesday.
jamaica wary of upsetting its caribbean basin allies has apparently instructed its lobbyist to abandon the provision initially drafted by mr. gray but the greater question is whether mr. inouye who has strong ties to the sugar industry is able to insert a claim by the philippines.
store does not support an inbox.
africa/kigali.
a user.
unable to show help as is not a directory. please check your installation.
dedication.
fixation.
among its new customers : day-care centers that previously spurned the service.
a total of 1,993,000 kilo liters of petroleum products in estimated to be required during the eighth plan period.
atlantic/bermuda.
a large investor will likely cause the futures market to decline when he sells his futures.
advanced filter pack options.
recursive needs at least one path argument.
the position of the united states which once contributed 25  of the budget is that nothing has changed.
polls once named tokyo giants star tatsunori hara a  humble uncomplaining obedient soul  as the male symbol of japan.
documents/tex.
china was the real victim and it is unjust to reprove china for it.
keep icons sorted by name in rows.
select primary color to adjust.
there was an error launching the default action command associated with this location.
due to the lack of growth in employment opportunities in nonagricultural sectors, the labour force subsisting on agriculture could not be transferred to other sectors.
a spokesman for the toronto cable television and telecommunications concern said the coupon rate has n't yet been fixed but will probably be set at around 8.
a widget to display in place of the usual expander label.
shared.
only very recently attention has been given to feasibility studies and the other prerequisites of sound industrial development.
bratislava.
compressed size.
unread.
picture opacity.
flag the currently selected package for installation or upgrade.
could not allocate space for config info.
randomize the tile opacity by this percentage.
houlton.
cypriot syllabary.
whether the combo box grabs focus when it is clicked with the mouse.
by date.
gansu.
highlighted guideline color.
lines.
the current position of the insertion cursor in chars.
gasoline futures continued a sell-off that began monday.
horizontally aligned powersource.
to hold general elections in accordance with the constitution.
because of the fact that most of the small irrigation systems are operate by farmers, it seems desirable to pay special attention to such projects as can be managed and operated by themselves.
it is n't clear however who would win a waiting game.
gay gordons.
has progress.
start resizing the window via the keyboard.
nobody knows what happens in future.
europe/oslo.
guadeloupe.
set the repeat mode.
high per hectare costs of projects constructed at the government level.
three divisions at american express are working with buick on the promotion : the establishment services division which is responsible for all merchants and companies that accept the card ; the travel division ; and the merchandise sales division.
space style.
go to on file “”.
reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more.
as a part of overall efforts to reduce spending congress cut by $ 30 million the bush administration 's request for antitrust enforcement for fiscal 1990 which began oct. 1.
similarly, by mid july 1991, thee government sector had received rs, 7,373.1 million out of the total bank credit and investment disbursement of rs. 24,410.5 millions.
there are no short cuts for the professional.
the file that you dropped is not an image.
open parent.
cybernetics.
map to object.
multiply gradient 0,1.
screen shot.
drop shadow.
izhevsk.
insert spaces instead of tabs.
few clouds.
create standard gnome directories on startup.
sendmail.
none.
authentication required.
the new agreement incorporates significant provisions such as mutual understanding to be reached on the issue of the exemption of indian tax on the export of primary goods from nepal, the reduction of the mandatory constituent percentage of indigenous raw materials from 80 percent to 65 percent in the manufactured products of nepal, the reduction of internal value added from 50 percent to 40 percent and so on.
line number font for printing.
interactivity.
line character.
the referenced credentials have expired.
the local bodies upon mutual consultations and agreement may use the funds thus provided for specified projects on the basis of regional necessities.
from to pending.
system command.
plugin could not save image.
i deserve something for my loyalty  she says.
consequently, the share of the regular expenditure in economic and social sectors showed a decline in the total regular expenditure.
a year ago moody 's also had shearson under review for possible downgrade  he said.
to keep program-trading units profitable in the eyes of senior brokerage executives traders must seize every opportunity their computers find.
heritage media which already owns about 51  of pop radio proposed paying pop radio shareholders with shares of a new class of heritage media preferred stock that would be convertible into four shares of heritage media 's common.
seek forwards.
couldn't resolve address for configuration source.
number of rows in a custom game.
arm troubles forced him back to the minors the next year.
while the senate commerce committee has approved legislation similar to the house bill on airline leveraged buy-outs the measure has n't yet come to the full floor.
show multiple pages.
copy to folder.
but the pharmaceutical company said it  anticipates the long-term savings resulting from the plan 's implementation will more than offset short-term costs.
move the mouse to change threshold.
let the direction from the center determine the direction of the stroke.
this game is unable to provide a hint.
default terminal application.
the non governmental organizations which are more motivated by social service then profit and also more experienced in working in close association with rural people, are better suited to the tasks of rural development and poverty alleviation.
select paths to reverse.
remove file from playlist.
memory stick.
not authorized.
system.
ralston said its eveready battery unit was hurt by continuing economic problems in south america.
cisco  switch.
island lake.
shows a red dot to figure the step's activity.
zoom the page out.
prompt when user expunges.
every individual is endowed with personal choice.
skip development warning dialog.
unable to eject media.
value out of range.
use background color.
mr. giuliani 's campaign chairman peter powers says the dinkins ad is  deceptive.
trying to group with no selected objects.
initial delay in milliseconds.
saxonyanhalt.
theme.
width of the left margin in pixels.
terms were n't disclosed.
beijing 's rulers complained to the former president about u.s.  interference  in china 's domestic affairs.
the jack of spades.
must specify list index.
object properties.
gnomeiconselection couldn't open directory.
filling out detailed forms about these individuals would tip the irs off and spark action against the clients he said.
depending upon the suitability of climatic conditions and access to services, agricultural diversification in cash -crops, horticultures, vegetable farming and livestock will be emphasized.
add specified tracks to the play queue.
name lookup failed.
automatically installed.
you cannot get it.
irkutsk.
truth or consequences.
preparing folder for offline.
no "extentangle" or "to" attribute on element.
all information in these memos will be deleted and can not be restored.
therefore corruption is taken as the major social problem.
use.
no efforts were made that year for the formulation and implementation of plan.
compensate for darkening.
paste the clipboard.
header 2.
size factor gradient.
preliminary clarification tank.
in the process if implementing this system, the budget was increased 5 to 6 times in the districts where the education plan had been introduced; the schools run with the public participation were brought under the government employees on the name of making the teaching profession attractive, a ten- month mandatory field work under the national development service porgramme was introduced; sixteen institutes and campuses were established by bringing about fundamental changes in the administrative set up of teaching institutions providing higher education.
classic color scheme.
horizontally.
messages not junk.
email recipient certificate.
shoutcast playlist.
mr. rubendall couldn't be reached.
percentage of width of brush.
reading extended state information.
trace bitmap.
set light source color.
can't get symbol 'customtype' from any module. editing shapes is disabled.
sphere designer.
quit the program.
evolution account assistant.
modesto.
there may be others doing what she did.
single card deals.
personal file sharing.
directory macro.
in spite of huge past investment made in this sector, farming still depends, to a large extent, on rainfall.
martin.
icon not present in theme.
whether this tag scales the font size by a factor.
schleswigholstein.
the nation 's largest pension fund which oversees $ 80 billion for college employees plans to offer two new investment options to its 1.2 million participants.
editable.
thus, a large segment of population is deprived of the basic necessities of life.
this message does not contain the header information required for this action.
the folder name is invalid because it contains the character.
file saved.
move to workspace down.
prewitt compass.
ink tool calligraphystyle painting.
the theory : such individuals many with young children are in their prime borrowing years and having borrowed from the bank they may continue to use it for other services in later years.
null tooldata in toolmenuselect.
bcpio document.
musical appreciation and music making are also open to the blind.
maker note.
cable modem.
italian chemical giant montedison s.p.a. through its montedison acquisition n.v. indirect unit began its $ 37-a-share tender offer for all the common shares outstanding of erbamont n.v. a maker of pharmaceuticals incorporated in the netherlands.
american city business journals inc. said its president michael k. russell will resign rather than relocate to new headquarters in charlotte n.c.
seed for jail solution fails to take root it 's a two birds with one stone deal : eggers group architects propose using grain elevators to house prisoners.
flag the currently selected package for removal.
michael kean director of marketing for ctb macmillan/mcgraw the macmillan/mcgraw division that publishes learning materials says it is n't aimed at improving test scores.
insert point.
search spirals.
end world hunger.
menu path.
time remaining.
palette folders.
print preview.
certificate is a ca certificate. edit trust settings.
settings for this mapfile.
although some progress was made in social and physical infrastructural sectors, the progres s appeared remarkable only in comparison to the negligible figures of the base year.
he said that for the second month in a row food processors reported a shortage of nonfat dry milk.
the file already exists inreplacing it will overwrite its contents.
xml document.
without admitting or denying wrongdoing they consented to findings of violations of escrow and record-keeping rules.
displays visualizations.
moving messages into folder.
constant and proper communication of news, views and ideas to the various stakeholders creates a good impression.
wausau.
didn't understand ' list must end with a.
this can have its purposes at times but there's no reason to cloud the importance and allure of western concepts of freedom and justice.
but the ratings are considerably below expectations and some stations say they may not buy new episodes when their current contracts expire.
highlight.
use 1 byte runlengthencoding.
save channel mixer settings.
top attach.
please select a valid backup file to restore.
title foreground color.
confirm poweroff request.
silver and platinum which have more of an industrial nature than gold were even weaker he said.
when toggled, the resulting image will be scaled to fit into the given size without changing the aspect ratio.
invalid authorization mechanism.
edit text files.
languages.
under such circumstances, while genuine entrepreneurs become discouraged, industrialists and traders, adept at exploiting nontransparent policies to their benefits, will have the upper hand.
simplify.
the information thread will help in networking various cultures and conflicts.
assorted.
5/2 distributor.
the consequence is what is called 'global warming'.
program version.
they did n't have much luck during the reagan administration.
the benchmark 30-year bond about 1/4 point or $ 2.50 for each $ 1,000 face amount.
the unit's abbreviation e.g. "cm" for centimeters.
to quote the highly regarded director of a privately funded drop-in center for the homeless in new york :  if you 're homeless you do n't sleep for fear of being robbed or murdered.
run a program.
this time it was for dinner and dancing a block away.
one way road sign.
there is no active layer or channel to cut from.
required parameters not passed in.
next page.
olympia.
paste into.
yesterday carnival said a new company has been formed in finland that will carry on waertsilae 's shipbuilding operations.
the desired maximum width of the label, in characters.
save creation time.
cairo scalable vector graphics.
distance unit.
set dialog timeout in seconds.
the beds at the bowery mission seem far drearier when he has to tuck a little girl into one of them at night.
terminal.
error writing state file.
new window.
sets the pixel format to use for mouse pointers.
comment.
mark citations in the message "preview".
use exponent map.
palm pixmap image.
besides, tube wells and wells constructed in the past will be renovated as needed.
rows.
koksijde.
show grid.
sort by ratio.
drag threshold.
show size.
if left unchecked, it will soon become the major cause of preventable death.
no broken packages.
these imports totaled about $ 17 million last year.
requests.
the van nuys calif. thrift had net income of $ 132,000 or three cents a share a year ago.
reset.
scanning all devices.
the refund was about $ 55 million more than previously ordered by the illinois commerce commission and trade groups said it may be the largest ever required of a state or local utility.
as mentioned above, the government does not believe in excessive government control in economic activities.
label xalign.
groupwise conference.
fashion offers great variety in the field of human dress.
click.
highlight current line.
drinking water programmes had been initiated especially in urban areas and some rural areas prior to 1960.
validation error.
savin cited  a general softening in the demand for office products in the market segments in which savin competes.
tebessa.
undo the last action.
firstly, the selection of appropriate projects and new policies of evaluation will give rise to increased efficiency in various sectors.
channel modes.
show session management options.
whether tabs should have homogeneous sizes.
prevent.
sweetwater.
nepalese are great foodies and their food varieties are hot, spicy and nutritious.
size in memory.
sunday.
style has already been specified for state resize focus.
whether tearoff menu items should be added to menus.
render fractal art.
a freeform label for the object.
consider moving something into an empty slot.
that designation would among other things provide more generous credit terms under which the soviets could purchase grain.
hyper active.
camp springs.
default format.
no actions available.
calabozo.
mr. baldwin is also attacking the greater problem : lack of ringers.
the profit motive of the major shareholders has clearly changed for the better  said john mcmillin a food industry analyst for prudential-bache in new york.
the main factors for the increase in money supply was due to the increase in foreign assets by 14 percent and in internal borrowings by 26.1 percent.
örebro.
crown publishing group acquired last year is said to be turning in disappointing results.
magicpoint presentation.
the toggle state of the button.
show text entry options.
file browser filter pattern.
edit template.
verilog.
1.buy a new chevrolet.
change selected text to lower case.
add additional guides.
highlights.
the nasdaq 100 index of the biggest nonfinancial stocks gained 1.39 to 446.62.
cancún.
configure the application.
checkerboard.
the 1990 appropriations legislation attempts *-1 to strip the president of his powers to make certain appointments as provided by article ii.
unpacked.
mr. egnuss 's dislike of program trading is echoed by many small investors interviewed by wall street journal reporters across the country.
attribute is invalid on element in this context.
find options.
about zenity.
we rushed him to the emergency and casualty ward.
as many as 70 u.k. and international banks stand to lose several hundred million pounds should the decision be upheld and set a precedent for other municipalities.
activate the focused image.
preview.
pick the lightness of the color.
add files to the archive.
sign this key.
the underwriters expect a double-a rating from moody 's.
then just as an image of the statue of thomas jefferson dissolves from the screen the announcer continues :  on the issue of abortion marshall coleman wants to take away your right to choose and give it to the politicians.
option requires an integer argument, not.
drawing area.
totally absorbed the ringers stare straight ahead using peripheral vision they call it  rope-sight  to watch the other ropes and thus time their pulls.
similarly, in order to reduce the student enrolment pressure on existing campuses and provide joboriented education to students, a 12class higher secondary education 102 programme was initiated.
to further load the stakes mr. lane dreamed up a highly improbable romance for the artist with a young woman who owns her own children 's shop and who lives in an expensive high-rise apartment building.
select at least one nonconnector object.
really clear image's undo history?
recenter.
at least two file names are equal.
whether the expander has been opened to reveal the child widget.
totem could not play.
recently added.
at the sight of the paper, some are very happy while others look sad and disappointed.
enter passphrase for.
out of memory for new cleanup entry with many arguments.
colorify.
button layout test.
replace the running window manager with metacity.
the string displayed in the child's menu entry.
encrypted, weak.
public communication means will be used while implementing the programme with a view to provide equal opportunity to all for participation.
växjö.
new seed.
j. landis martin nl president and chief executive officer said nl and mr. simmons cut the price they were proposing for georgia gulf because they initially planned a transaction that included about $ 250 million in equity and a substantial amount of high-yield subordinated debt.
cloud dark.
fixedsheet exchanger.
hyperlink color.
each clone's opacity is determined by the picked value in that point.
optical transport.
possible values are "on", "off", and "custom".
builddependencies for could not be satisfied.
initial value.
integra which owns and operates hotels said that hallwood group inc. has agreed to exercise any rights that are n't exercised by other shareholders.
adjust hue / lightness / saturation.
a free, marketoriented liberal policy will be adopted in order to maintain an efficient flow and optimum utilization of resources in diverse agricultural activities.
ford which already has an unwelcome 13.2  holding is prepared to bid for the entire company and had lobbied the government to lift the takeover restrictions early.
empty junk folders on exit.
it 's a classic situation of ads that are true but not always fully accurate.
select objects to convert to pattern.
sandstorm in the vicinity.
icon sizes.
television service has been operational in nepal since 1985.
foreground color.
skagway.
britain has two main index-arbitrage instruments.
telerate provides an electronic financial information network.
option does not take a value.
widget to put in column header button instead of column title.
focus the brush strokes around the center of the image.
read error from process.
key echo.
merge.
alternate the sign of color changes for each row.
illiteracy and discrimination of castes are also possible causes of child labour.
, core dumped.
waertsilae marine 's biggest creditor is miami-based carnival cruise lines inc.
tottori.
gconf moniker.
edge.
getting a level playing field.
only 7,5 percent will be borne through internal borrowing.
update login records when command is launched.
with a view to strengthening the internal air service, permission was granted to private sector to operate domestic flights.
pause the game.
but the most injurious is the sound of aeroplanes that travels to the earth passage over which they fly.
do not ask me about this program again.
open web page.
foreground set.
drag handle.
center on horizontal axis.
command line option is not understood.
unlike many u.s. investors those in asia or europe seeking foreign-stock exposure may be less resistant to paying higher prices for country funds.
unable to parse package file 2.
shortcut keys.
no more unvisited links.
is fuzzy at byte.
1.3 irrigation: before the advent of the panchayat system, the irrigation facility was only available to 11,428  ha. of land.
empathy should autoconnect on startup.
the minimum unit is $ 100,000.
that represents a very thin  excess  return certainly far less than what most fundamental stock pickers claim to seek as their performance objective.
short label.
encrypted.
cannot build locking helper pipe.
controls how intense the highlights will be.
diffraction patterns.
toggle button.
a student who is weak at theoretical study can be brilliant at other extra curricular activities.
to the extent they can do this they 're quite content to get a return on investment of 1  to 2.
in lowersecondary education, the student enrolment figure being 344,138, the number of schools 3,964 and the number of teachers 74,849, the schoolstudent ratio remained at 187 and teacherstudent ration at 128 by mid april 1990.
when it occurs the traders place orders via computers to buy the basket of stocks such as the 500 stocks that constitute the standard & poor 's 500 stock index in whichever market is cheaper and sell them in the more expensive market ; they lock in the difference in price as profit.
fatal parse error in brush file  not a gimp brush file.
failed to stat.
the year-ago results included a $ 415 million charge in the 1988 second quarter for underperforming real estate and mortgage loans.
in class, we had to shut all the windows and switch on the lights for the day had grown very dark.
few if any index-fund managers will risk leveraging performance by owning more than 100  exposure to stocks and equally few will want to own less than a 100  position should stocks rise.
several fed governors in washington have been pushing for easier credit ; but many of the regional fed presidents have been resisting such a move.
import.
advanced options.
preview widget active.
1 transport :  a.
deleted.
motion blur.
priority will be given to the construction of low-cost projects for their sustained operation through maximum mobilisation of available resources with the participation of government and semi-government organisations and private and non-government sector.
poland.
to continue, type the phrase.
on film.
run evince as a previewer.
the city 's campaign finance board has refused to pay mr. dinkins $ 95,142 in matching funds because his campaign records are incomplete.
framemaker interchange document.
song properties.
and though the size of the loan guarantees approved yesterday is significant recent experience with a similar program in central america indicates that it could take several years before the new polish government can fully use the aid effectively.
nec one of its largest domestic competitors said it bid one yen in two separate public auctions since 1987.
signing certificate not found.
in many asian nations, there are limits to press freedom.
play a sound when we log in.
asia/pyongyang.
news reported on websites appears more reliable and transparent though one has to be careful about the accuracy of the facts reported.
import.
the principal objectives that the plan aspires to achieve are as following a.
a second citation covering the company 's clairton pa. coke works involved more than 200 alleged violations of electrical-safety and other requirements for which osha proposed $ 1.2 million in fines.
saved password or login.
save conversation.
software license terms.
plain text mode.
switch to tab 9.
expected at least one package/version pair following.
vertical options.
reading palette file  invalid number of columns in lineusing default value.
the welfare department too should provide financial assistance and medical access to disabled persons who come from poor backgrounds.
creating diffraction pattern.
can't overwrite existing readonly value.
could not open file.
convolution matrix.
a plan to bring the stock to market before year end apparently was upset by the recent weakness of frankfurt share prices.
construction work of big projects planned to provide irrigation facility to large areas not being completed in time and completed projects not operating in full capacity.
this compares with estimates that the u.s.  derivatives  market is perhaps four times as large as the underlying domestic market.
delete files and remove.
remove link.
mashhad.
size of the font used to display the log.
simulate glow by making highlights intense and fuzzy.
the radio-station owner and programmer said it was trying to obtain additional working capital from its senior secured lenders and other financial institutions.
an example plugin that does stuff  see the description.
stop playback.
artist.
owensboro.
rep. gary ackerman noted that past food aid had harmed farmers in el salvador and egypt.
despite their handicap, they play an important role in our lives and at the same time the need our respect, acceptance and understanding.
moderate rain.
would download/install/remove packages.
the minimum degree of enlargment.
moveto not at start of bezier.
check for junk.
he has made a harsh brilliant picture one that 's captivating about a character who viewed from the most sympathetic angle would seem disagreeable.
accept license.
according to the new classification of industrial products, it is estimated that the production of food products, beverages, textile, tobacco products, shoes, plastic goods, the products of iron and steel based industries have increased during the period under review.
taylorville.
unexpected data after package and selection at line.
dodge / burn tool selectively lighten or darken using a brush.
couldn't parse layout encoding error in column descriptor.
program trading itself according to many academics who have studied it is merely caught in the middle of this battle unfairly labeled as the evil driving force of the marketplace.
run scripts.
changed contact.
merrill lynch ready assets trust : 8.64.
v font.
some translations or writing aids available for your chosen languages are not installed yet. do you want to install them now?
preferred contact.
subprocess received a segmentation fault.
the market was dragged up by the scruff of its neck by wall street and by market makers getting caught short.
there was no name defined for it.
irrigation projects in underconstruction stage.
thus the extent of deficit financing will be much lower in this plan than in the previous plans.
roads :  prior to 1950, the facility of motorable road in the country was almost non-existent.
america/menominee.
london shares also rose while trading in frankfurt west germany ended higher.
could not retrieve the user's profile. this most likely means that the user does not exist however, yahoo! sometimes does fail to find a user's profile. if you know that the user exists, please try again later.
in a monthly report prepared for use at the fed 's next federal open market committee meeting on nov. 14. the nation 's central bank found that price increases have moderated and economic activity has grown at a sluggish pace in recent weeks.
drought means disease, hunger, dehydration and death to animals and humans alike.
during the same period, the agreement reached with india on trade, transit and the control of unauthorized trade removed the feeling of instability prevalent in the trade sector.
real resize.
ip source.
the inputtoken contains an invalid signature, or a signature that could not be verified.
recommends.
topic set to.
various useful representations.
draw desktop background.
you land on a set of sharp iron spikes! more.
this year the railroad holding company acquired 850 such railcars.
maryland.
while he reaffirmed support for the country 's feb. 25 elections ortega indicated that renewed u.s. military aid to the contras could thwart the balloting.
screensaver.
there can only be one active wheel controller. you already have a wheel controller in your list of active controllers.
third.
although she was kind and playful to her children she was dreadful to her war-damaged husband ; she openly brought her lover into their home.
alphabetic presentation forms.
do you want to create a new archive with these files?
error reading file.
name already exists in storage.
whether to ask for confirmation when closing terminal windows.
the show must go on !
folder.
remove from toolbar.
hence, there appeared to be a lack of continuity and longterm analysis in the process of selection and identification of goals.
width of board.
not supported by client.
moderate snow grains.
list of people who have contributed artwork to the program.
bartow.
these factors consist of, on the one hand, the positive aspects of the new aspirations and enthusiasm among the general public and, on the other, the negative aspects of the legacy of economic depravity left behind by the panchayat regime.
palmer.
text of the frame's label.
new password.
search rectangles.
there were no incentives to attract investment towards industries directly associated with the need of the society.
as the liberal and open policies professed by the new industrial policy for improvements on the economy as a whole will create a competitive industrial climate, maximum benefits must be derived from the changed climate by enhancing the industrial capabilities of the entrepreneurs involved in this sector.
popup menu.
artists and albums.
the concept begot a slew of copycats but the banks stopped promoting the packages.
copy link location.
the record corn-buying binge by the soviet union is causing serious bottlenecks in the u.s. grain pipeline.
release.
delete template.
keep aligned.
select pattern folders.
lungi.
purging.
this is called the television.
correct spelling.
reshow last.
sound events.
beginning in 1980 courts in several states including california and new york decided to suspend the common-law rule that plaintiffs must prove that the defendants are the ones who are liable.
taken on.
spider.
the tourist industry is seen as a way to alleviate poverty and achieve greater social equity in the country.
messina.
blend.
infrared remote control.
antialiasing.
limit search to the current selection.
cannot delete folder  no such folder.
vidalia.
the bond fund will invest in high-grade or medium-grade bonds mortgages or asset-backed securities including as much as 15  in foreign securities.
whether to strike through the text.
birchwood.
align baseline anchors of texts horizontally.
reenter new password.
although takeover experts said they doubted mr. steinberg will make a bid by himself the application by his reliance group holdings inc. could signal his interest in helping revive a failed labor-management bid.
for majority of cinema-goers, it is nothing but a cheap and interesting form of entertainment and pastime.
it 's precisely the kind of product that 's created the municipal landfill monster  the editors wrote.
rosario.
usage.
display window buttons using the desktop toolbar setting.
database server error.
please enter the name of the user you wish to block.
network server.
confirm.
no name.
does not appear to be an icc color profile.
templates.
pixels above lines.
market facilities will be intensively improved in order to aid the convenient supply of necessary agricultural inputs as well as the sale and purchase of surplus agricultural produce.
alternate tiles.
4.3 drinking water: it is estimated that by the end of f.y. 1990/91, 5,878,000 people in the rural areas and 1,163,000 people in the urban areas, a total of 7,041,000 people had access to drinking water facilities.
workday end minute.
asia/macau.
semnan.
extract here.
pixels above lines.
mask size.
warning node not understood below.
align center of target.
track submission failed too many times.
load/save options.
lisbon.
similarly, the growth of efficiency in some sectors, too, will cause a marginal decline in the incremental capital output ratio.
cedilla.
open folder.
angle span.
make the window appear in tasklists.
simplification and clarification of administrative processes in order to private initiative from being suppressed.
despite religion teaching tolerance, acceptance, good deeds and moral values, these fanatics hijack their own religion for personal ends.
convert selected object's stroke to paths.
equalize does not operate on indexed layers.
decrypting message.
redeals left.
open as.
the service which costs the caller from 30 cents to $ 25 a minute currently is dominated by celebrity chatter horoscopes and romance lines.
permission was granted within this period to three private companied to operate air services and to one to operate companies to operate air services and to one to operate helicopter service.
the anthers in these plants are difficult to clip off.
statusbar is visible.
destripe.
copenhagen.
a waste management spokeswoman says its ad in the premiere issue was a one-time purchase and it does n't have any plans * to advertise in future issues.
expand.
failure remote does not support proposed hash function.
create new image.
vietnamese.
there is no message of the day associated with this connection.
udon thani.
mr. russell who co-founded the kansas city mo.-based local business publications concern here said he would have a five-year consulting agreement with the company which recently underwent an ownership change.
charles d. phipps sr. hermitage pa. fined $ 10,000 ; david scott rankin lake st. louis mo. $ 15,000 ; leigh a. sanderoff gaithersburg md. fined $ 45,000 ordered to disgorge $ 12,252 ; sandra ann smith ridgefield n.j. $ 15,000 ; james g. spence aloha ore. $ 5,000 and six-month suspension ; mona sun jamaica estates n.y. $ 60,000 ; william swearingen minneapolis $ 15,000 and six-month suspension ; john bew wong san francisco $ 25,000 ; rabia m. zayed san francisco $ 50,000.
the given filename does not have any known file extension. please enter a known file extension or select a file format from the file format list.
nonrepudiation.
unknown polyline subtype.
requested mail action okay, completed.
grid color.
invalid room name.
manually specify the stroke size.
couldn't save resource file.
remove all keyboard shortcuts.
the less complicated version of playing tunes on bells as do the carillons of continental europe is considered by the english to be childish fit only for foreigners.
restore icon's original size.
he said the exchange is  headed for a real crisis  if program trading is n't curbed.
therefore, the current and future development perspectives will be accorded special emphasis in order to benefit from the ecological interrelationships between the hills and terai.
ralston shares closed yesterday at $ 80.50 off $ 1 in new york stock exchange composite trading.
however, no real increase in export volume could be matherialised due to the lake of sustainable and sound bases through product diversification.
groups.
thumbnails.
albion.
however, as the price indices are available from 1972/73 only, it was possible process only from that year.
couldn't access trash.
provide.
projects with less cost per hectare will be selected after the survey of potential projects requested by the farmer.
successfully finished testing!
icon path.
temple however harshly criticized sea containers ' plan yesterday characterizing it as a  highly conditional device designed to entrench management confuse shareholders and prevent them from accepting our superior cash offer.
communication.
add port group.
softproof rendering intent.
it will make distribution much wider and quicker.
fill and stroke.
type of click used to launch/open files.
reduction of regional imbalances in nepal, poverty has acquired spatial variations.
unable to parse message.
both contracts have gained a following since the 1987 global market crash.
the management group owns about 18  of the stock most purchased at nominal prices and would stand to gain millions of dollars if the company were sold.
disability refers to the condition of being physically or mentally disabled or challenged.
true if the window should not be in the pager.
crossconnector.
file icon theme.
it also helps explain the reluctance of the major farm lobbies and many lawmakers to make any significant changes in the 1985 farm program next year.
hexagon. six sided shape.
channel.
initialize session from savefile.
scoring high matched on 64.5.
bigfork.
mr. baum said the two have orders to  focus on bottom-line profits  and to  take a hard look at our businesses what is good what is not so good.
does not sound like.
rulers.
palette.
select all.
horizontal style.
posterize.
another proposed reform is to have program traders answer to an  uptick rule  a reform instituted after the great crash of 1929 that protects against stocks being relentlessly beaten downward by those seeking to profit from lower prices namely short sellers.
buying plans were mixed in october with fewer households indicating plans to buy cars and more saying they will buy homes and appliances in the coming six months.
adler.
u.s. trade officials said the philippines and thailand would be the main beneficiaries of the president 's action.
click to burn the line.
drawing.
no document selected.
other date.
invalid authentication.
but do n't breathe too easy : those dividend increases may signal trouble ahead for stock prices some analysts warn.
zoom to fit selection in window.
a free, market-oriented liberal policy will be adopted in order to maintain an efficient flow and optimum utilization of resources in diverse agricultural activities.
san diego.
right bracket.
auld lang syne.
unmounting cdrom.
invert the brightness of each pixel.
when enabled the dialog automatically follows the image you are working on.
the large investment of the private sector in industry was greatly attracted to the activities yielding quick and easy return.
add files asking the name of the archive and quit the program.
save the changes to image before closing?
search needs at least one file name pattern argument.
perm'.
producers were granted the right earlier this year to ship sugar and the export licenses were expected to have begun to be issued  yesterday.
it is essential to canalize the aspirations and enthusiasm of the people generated by the political change in the country to the mainstream of development, and to identify, formulate, implement and distribute the benefits thereof on the basis of peopleâ€™s participat ion.
guangxi.
no items found.
such a state of counterproductive investments in irrigation sector is sure to make a negative impact on the national economy.
timber timer is used in industries, construction work and for fuel wood.
alignment.
extensions.
you turn to stone more.
kajaani.
asia/shanghai.
keyboard shortcut to set the terminal title.
auto indentation.
rovaniemi.
right margin.
all these unconventional sources of energy are free from environmental hazards and are economical too.
expander size.
cara a food services chain operator and unicorp a holding company are based in toronto.
unlock.
corn prices have been sluggish this fall despite the huge soviet orders because the harvest has allowed farmers to rebuild the stockpiles depleted by the 1988 drought.
select type.
and some investors fault mr. spiegel 's life style ; he earns millions of dollars a year and flies around in columbia 's jet planes.
/buddies/quit.
if any event happens in any corner of the world, it spreads all over the world with sound and picture in a second.
unshade.
but since the 1990 model year began oct. 1 buick sales have plunged 33.
body contains.
whether to show type field in the event/task/meeting editor.
license agreement.
close document.
flow style.
propagating rate.
the word dissemination it decided referred only to itself.
glamorous and pure-voiced as ever ms. collins sang joni mitchell's  for free  about an encounter with a street-corner clarinetist to which mr. stoltzman contributed a clarinet obligatto and mr. douglas's lush setting of a gaelic blessing  deep peace.
error loading icon.
while the production of jute goods decreased at an average of 6 percent per annum during the period, the production of agricultural tools and bricks and tiles decreased at 4.1 and 1.8 percent respectively.
the inconsistent state of the button.
dashed.
valid priorities are.
paste as new.
retry.
could not load.
the golden share restricts any individual holding to 15  and expires at the end of 1990.
previous window.
copy.
open a window to preview objects at different icon resolutions.
unfilled triangle.
print simulation profile.
wrangell.
unknown state for button.
image name.
therefore a man is as conscious of his clothes as of his status.
some 4,300 institutions are part of the pension fund.
the most widely useful method for sharpening an image.
undo.
error was expected but given.
use the system fixed width font.
bordeaux 's first growths from 1985 and 1986 are $ 60 to $ 80 each except for the smallest in terms of production chateau petrus which costs around $ 250 !
manage favorite rooms.
crl signer.
volume up.
on top of all these poor maintenance has added to the woes.
check incoming mail being junk.
government construction spending rose 4.3  to $ 88 billion.
members.
programming.
has no build depends.
the brightness of the video.
somerset.
a seat on the chicago board of trade was sold for $ 350,000 down $ 16,000 from the previous sale last friday.
save as draft.
stop when pixel differences are smaller than this value.
paste quotation.
over the recent years, there has been an increased trend of migration from rural to urban areas.
he adorns his body with the best of clothes that add to his charms.
copy.
set.
thus, compared to the seventh plan, investment during the eighth plan period will have to be increased by 10.6 percent per annum.
the increasing government participation and interference and the lack of a favorable atmosphere for the involvement of private sector also contributed to the slow growth of the industrial sector.
africa/lubumbashi.
lets you send raw input to textbased protocols.
publishing frequency.
failed to sync one or more sources.
if you go to bed straightaway, you will run the risk of getting your stomach upset.
and he plans to brief the president at the end of the week u.s. sources said.
net cash income the amount left in farmers ' pockets after deducting expenses from gross cash income increased in 33 states in 1988 as the drought cut into crop yields and drove up commodity prices the department 's economic research service reported yesterday.
heat, light, electricity, water and sound, besides a number of things are provided by nature.
expires.
pattern.
sound command for filename.
from color.
error reading.
horizontally aligned inductor european.
display the previous message.
bucket fill.
reed international plc said that net income for the six months ended oct. 1 slipped 5  to # 89.7 million $ 141.9 million or 16 pence a share from # 94.8 million $ 149.9 million or 17.3 pence a share.
sales for the year rose 5  to $ 12.52 billion from $ 11.95 billion in fiscal 1988.
request denied.
williams duluth ga. is an insurance and financial-services holding company.
the one character at least somewhat interesting was irving louis lobsenz a pediatrician who changed his name to rusty kent london and became a master gambler and author of a book on blackjack.
enable debugging.
thus, the essential and effective prerequisites for national development, people's participation and people's labour contribution, could not be utilized for sustainable development orientated to people's welfare.
replicate selection.
enter a name for this template.
after all he says  even to make love you need experience.
perryton.
dia diagram file.
sorry, passwords do not match.
should not have "resize" attribute on element for maximized states.
last update.
with adequate provisions of necessary agricultural support services, intensive farming will be introduced in areas with access to irrigation facilities.
hickory.
saturation.
the villages.
subprocess failed with wait status code.
but even this is not the end of the story.
accesspoint.
writing to temporary mailbox failed.
if this is set to true, an icon linking to the network servers view will be put on the desktop.
extra space to put between the child and its left and right neighbors, in pixels.
interactively modify the image colors.
it involves studies of the human condition with its core being the capability approach.
installed file.
color exchange to color.
the average maturity for funds open only to institutions considered by some to be a stronger indicator because those managers watch the market closely reached a high point for the year 33 days.
currently sharedata has about 4.1 million common shares outstanding.
neither they nor mr. mcalpine could be reached for comment.
could not open folder.
decimal number.
radius.
plugin folders.
popup completion.
force aspect ratio to match that of the frame's child.
coordinate expression was empty or not understood.
table fill.
jaguar was shocked by mr. ridley 's decision because management had believed the government would n't lift the golden share without consulting the company first.
options.
altamira.
save resolution.
puerto limón.
server logfile.
moorhead.
what's next ?
set maximum value.
font style.
artists.
this methodology did not pay due at tention of the need to establish coordination between various internal and external variables.
among other things the survey found that manufacturing activity varied considerably across districts and among industries.
delete segment.
default value for thread expand state.
your password will expire today.
for instance, while the trade deficit increased by 19.4 percent as current account by 32.0 percent in 1974/75â€“1989/90, they recorded average annual growth rates of 14.5 percent and 11.5 percent respectively during the period 1989/901991/92.
text was empty or contained only whitespace.
networkmanager is not running.
but is to be installed.
high contrast color display filter.
when enabled, the image window will automatically resize itself whenever the physical image size changes.
amount of original color to show where no direct light falls.
yet our efforts are somehow less noble than those of an investment expert studiously devouring press clippings on each company he follows.
to attain this purpose, it will be essential especially to curtail the unproductive government expenditure, to increase the work efficiency of public undertakings, to monitor the price situation on a regular basis, to emphasize on the attainment of equilibrium in foreign trade and to improve the supply and distribution systems of essential commodities.
while a quarter of black voters disapprove of mr. bush 's handling of his job only 15  have a negative view of his spouse.
you are awaiting authorization from the following buddies.
mark all messages as read.
courts made the assumption that all des pills were essentially the same and created a market-share test so that damages would be assessed against drug makers in the proportion of their share of the original sales.
paste the clipboard.
aware of the failure of the government sector all over the world in the production and delivery of goods through resource allocation, the government will assume the role of a catalyst and promote of private sector rather than controlling or interfering with their economic activities.
combining diacritical marks.
no previous zoom.
kaliningrad.
pixels/.
mail notification.
normally open position switch vertical.
at the same time, while three industrial undertakings have already been privatized, the process of privatization will be further continued.
stroke style.
port/service.
the new  social choice  fund will shun securities of companies linked to south africa nuclear power and in some cases northern ireland.
brasília.
no one wants stock on their books.
foz do iguaçu.
cancel.
sorry, i can save only indexed and gray images.
gencorp inc. hurt by a plant accident and other unexpected costs said it expects to report that fiscal fourth-quarter profit from continuing operations will be significantly below last year 's $ 25 million.
the reaction in the newsroom was emotional.
sound is produced by the vibrations of an object and is transmitted in the form of waves.
saved search.
butt cap.
change-ringing a mind-boggling exercise the english invented 380 years ago requires physical dexterity some bells weigh more than a ton combined with intense mental concentration.
step increment.
he no longer crowds the plate.
the shadow password file is not present.
return.
autostretching contrast.
downloaded of image data.
while it implies that rapid industrial growth is not possible without tackling the energy constraints, the growth of agricultural production may be impeded by the lack of energy for lifeirrigation and processing of agricultural products.
compromised.
adaptive.
south african gold stocks closed marginally lower.
aim to place the suits in the order which fits the current layout most naturally.
parameters.
1.2  forest : in forestry development, while tree plantation was carried out in 8,956 hechtares in f.y. 1990/91, it was, carried out in 11,794 hectares in f.y. 1991/92.
policies: following policies will be pursued for achieving the irrigation targets set: 1.
clear document history.
remove.
although a total investment of rs. 61,139 million is proposed for the public sector, it will be necessary to spend development out lay equivalent to rs. 113.479 million during the eighth plan period.
contacts.
red frequency.
icons.
character details.
to achieve the aforementioned objectives, development and extension of irrigation facilities will be undertaken on the basis of following priorities 1.
join private group.
children must be taught their limbs and lives are very valuable and they must not take risk.
america/indiana/vevay.
cleaning while a download is in progress is not allowed.
package architecture  does not match system.
peek.
"deepness" of the color.
1.3 irrigation before the advent of the panchayat system, the irrigation facility was only available to 11,428 ha. of land.
free software only.
it has to be considered as an additional risk for the investor  said gary p. smaby of smaby group inc. minneapolis.
in order to make use of  all feasible development prospects, the eights plan has accorded special priority to the overall development of this sector.
subprocess exited unexpectedly.
switcher appearance.
he earned his doctorate in nuclear physics from the massachusetts institute of technology.
add user id to.
so far the grain industry 's budding logistical problems have n't been a major factor in the trading of corn contracts at the chicago board of trade.
they must figure that justice has to get done by somebody but know it wo n't be done by congress.
a careful analysis will show that war is fought only because of lust for power.
switzerland.
spell checking.
can't get type and set/unset simultaneously.
everything will be taken over by the new company  said christian andersson executive vice president of oy waertsilae former parent of waertsilae marine.
there are many aspects of the western culture that are deemed not suitable for asians.
show controls.
in the first place, the power entrusted to local bodies were not of permanent nature as the bodies themselves were liable to be dismissed at any time at the discretion of the government.
but it is not going to be installed.
the package lists or status file could not be parsed or opened.
including drawops here would create a circular reference.
learning materials for the fifth-grade contains at least a dozen examples of exact matches or close parallels to test items.
in addition the u.s. this year offered its own plan for cooperation around the pacific rim in a major speech by secretary of state james baker following up a proposal made in january by australian prime minister bob hawke.
superscript 1.
medicine hat.
port alexander.
compose new message.
number of columns to display.
whether or not the typing break screen can be postponed.
so long l.a.  was chosen as the paper 's final headline.
in composite trading on the new york stock exchange yesterday comprehensive care closed at $ 3.75 a share up 12.5 cents.
in accordance with this policy, government owned enterprises and corporations will be gradually privatized.
the sale comes in place of a planned initial public offering of lentjes stock.
search column.
in late trading the shares were up a whopping 122 pence -lrb- $ 1.93 -rrb- a 16.3  gain to a record 869 pence on very heavy volume of 9.7 million shares.
movemail program failed.
he contends that the perception in japan of a vitriolic u.s. response to sony corp. 's announcement of its purchase of columbia pictures entertainment inc. has been temporarily mollified.
ignored relative path.
pacific/efate.
encryption is not supported by this cipher.
it felt more like a party or a highly polished jam session with a few friends than a classical concert.
clintonville.
issuer.
class stereotype icon.
data object.
wrap after this length.
thus, though there was a considerable increase in foreign currency reserves during this period, development of a regular and sustainable source of foreign exchange increased due to excessive flow if foreign loan and grants and as these are not reliable sources, a situation persisted where there was the possibility of drastic reduction of the reserves.
default formatting.
data socket timed out.
news print : during the eighth plan period, the demand for newsprint in estimated to be 18,000 metric tons the entire demand is expected to be met through import.
allowed authentication methods.
invalid value for.
karlstad.
this is n't buick 's first travel-related promotion.
a boolean that determines whether the menu grabs the keyboard focus.
in schools, teachers have limited time to teach students.
it is also essential to curtail unproductive expenditures.
our lives have been drastically changed during these few years because of science and technology.
allow drawing of alternating color rows.
also mr. canepa received a two-week suspension  in a principal capacity.
gurmukhi.
neither lorillard nor the researchers who studied the workers were aware of any research on smokers of the kent cigarettes.
this led to anomalies in the allocation of resources.
now on a good day chicago 's stock-index traders trade more dollars worth of stock futures than the big board trades in stock.
offset path.
drifting snow.
no brushes available for use with this tool.
accidents are due to many causes and may occur under different circumstances.
fill out all fields completely.
kill user.
unindent.
goderich.
pressures began to build.
right margin position.
audio/video.
watrous.
python byte code.
the gromit binary was not found.
error reading archive member header.
edit nautilus preferences.
so now the situation is this : you have a right to read voice of america scripts if you do n't mind traveling to washington every week or so and visiting the voice office during business hours.
line style.
apalachicola.
whether to indent the selected text when the tab key is pressed.
your wand of breaks apart and explodes! more.
never load images from the internet.
then at a signal the ringers begin varying the order in which the bells sound without altering the steady rhythm of the striking.
williamsport.
room list.
remove from path.
last seen.
a review of the situation shows that the road available all over the kingdom in 1960/61 was 1198 km., out of which 339km. was metalled and 859 km. fair weather road.
pages.
thus, the plan has emphasized on bigger investment in rural areas for the development of non-agricultural activities such as development and renovation of infrastructure, expansion of agriculture through the use of electricity and cottage industries based on local energy resources.
atlantic/stanley.
status bar on right.
select palette folders.
makepackageview no main widget found.
but a soviet bank here would be crippled unless moscow found a way to settle the $ 188 million debt which was lent to the country 's short-lived democratic kerensky government before the communists seized power in 1917.
find remote keys.
don't fork into background.
open preferences for the connector tool.
traffic congestion is the first reason of high rate of accidents on this road.
africa/niamey.
build.
error reading conffiles file.
america/guatemala.
nonetheless one can't help wonder whether the game will be just a little bit slower.
as a result he said nbi will focus on servicing its installed base of systems trying to provide maintenance for other manufacturers and expanding its software business using some of the applications it developed for its hardware.
window positions.
attendee status could not be updated because the status is invalid.
electric.
the two of spades.
dotted.
spreads will become so tight that it wo n't matter which market an investor chooses arbitrage will prevent him from gaining any temporary profit.
america/cayman.
flip vertical.
working.
paste objects from clipboard to the original location.
use desktop default.
window manager.
warning.
continuous.
nantucket.
but rather than sell new 30-year bonds the treasury will issue $ 10 billion of 29year nine-month bonds essentially increasing the size of the current benchmark 30-year bond that was sold at the previous refunding in august.
interface information.
are you sure you want to close all programs and restart the computer?
invitation from sent.
no message of the day available.
spiral.
first name.
set up computer for ssh connection.
text tag table.
disable lock screen.
file exists but is not a regular file.
type of audio output to use.
composing.
angry.
eject.
it is a meeting.
selector preferences.
install ubuntu kylin.
folder unreadable.
shade transparent or image background.
number of processors to use.
show deleted messages in the messagelist.
add stroke.
no significant education has been achieven in the growth rates of population and infant mortality.
take from selection.
chiang mai.
optimize difference.
mother lives indoor and she has to do the entire household as well as baby's work.
connect to a remote computer or shared disk.
checks periodically for new releases.
we 're seeing it partly because older vintages are growing more scarce.
hold intensity.
go to the audio menu.
now he said the group plans to put in  several hundred million  dollars in equity and finance the remainder with bank debt.
nihilist.
however, no efforts were made towards developing a systematic settlement of the population along the growth or development corridors in desirable proportions and there were not launched, as required, any socio-economic programmes based on available local means and resources and focusing on the generation of employment opportunities either.
the batch interpreter is not available. batch mode disabled.
pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs.
we can only do our best to deal with these events when they occur.
lewis c. veraldi the father of the team that created the highly successful ford taurus and mercury sable cars retired early after experiencing recent heart problems.
europe/athens.
position in layout row, column.
dash length.
revert zoom.
america/jamaica.
none of the securities will be eligible for when-issued trading until congress approves an increase in the debt ceiling clearing the way for a formal offering mr. basham said.
name of entity with rights to the intellectual property of this document.
a name for the action group.
as custom color.
it 's also refreshing to read a japanese author who clearly does n't belong to the self-aggrandizing  we-japanese  school of writers who perpetuate the notion of the unique japanese unfathomable by outsiders.
tab trigger.
the estimated economic growth rates indicate a progressive upward trend in the rate of growth in the economy.
current song is not seekable.
last page.
resize/move.
domain type.
bad axe.
internal error.
mr. steinberg is thought to be on friendly terms with ual 's mr. wolf.
failed to read data from child process.
playback.
birth day.
volkel.
revert options.
unroll window.
finished.
mr. leming was n't surprised by the lower price cited by nl saying he believes that $ 55 a share is  the most you can pay for georgia gulf before it becomes a bad acquisition.
in modern war nothing is safe.
set item exclusive visible.
urbanization helps to bring down both mortality and fertility rates.
in his talks the former president urged china 's leaders to acknowledge that their nation is part of the world community and welcome the infusion of outside contacts and ideas.
requires a single bool result.
also the reforms allow the big board to halt trading for one hour if the dow jones industrial average falls 250 points and for two more hours if the dow slides an additional 150 points on the same day.
insert date/time.
south.
moves flat review to the word above the current word.
key file contains line which is not a keyvalue pair, group, or comment.
number of times to apply filter.
open.
add layer.
the latter allows one to forge fellowship with those who share the same interests, passion as well as similar moral and religious values.
in a way it guides the different organs to respond to the sound in different ways.
running tool.
move this folder to the trash.
the library room should have adequate natural light with sufficient windows for proper ventilation.
open the gradient selection dialog.
it would be in a quite and secluded area, away from the busy city.
adjust line spacing.
included file.
upjohn officials said they could n't estimate the size of the charge until they determine which employees and how many will participate in the retirement plan.
text below icons.
note.
then as if to show that he could play fast as well he offered the second movement from saint-saens 's sonata for clarinet a whimsical puckish tidbit that reflected the flip side of the stoltzman personality.
could not write.
it is caused by a variety of factors, some natural, others man-made.
dreyfus world-wide dollar the top-yielding fund had a seven-day compound yield of 9.37  during the latest week down from 9.45  a week earlier.
unsupported encryption type for multipart/encrypted.
mail from.
organization unit.
encoding.
gm has been negotiating a friendly transaction with jaguar that likely would involve joint ventures and an eventual stake of just under 30.
e as the date relating to the balance of payments situation are available from the year 1974/75 only, the corresponding analysis has been presented beginning from that year.
toolbar style.
in 1979 hearst hired editor james bellows who brightened the editorial product considerably.
stewart.
play a sound.
it carries mails quicker than the train or the steamer.
furthermore, the foreign exchange reform was another significant step undertaken during this period.
totem is free software you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the gnu general public license as published by the free software foundation either version 2 of the license, or at your option any later version.
image selection.
attachments.
the charges were offset in part by a gain from the sale of the company 's construction division.
the radio is yet another marvel.
hampton.
a successor was n't named which fueled speculation that mr. bernstein may have clashed with s.i. newhouse jr. whose family company advance publications inc. owns random house.
applications.
friends of education rates south carolina one of the worst seven states in its study on academic cheating.
gradient preferences.
shelby.
therefore, the greatest challenge now is to devise ways and means of discouraging these trends and steering the economy in the direction of more productive and sustainable economic development through appropriate policy reforms.
bad authentication response from server.
ground point.
real good  says 39-year-old pete broberg working in the midday heat of the tropics camp.
bridgeport.
plugin interpreters.
character table.
maximum.
neither equus nor tony lama gave a reason for the changed offer and tony lama could n't be reached for comment.
image viewer.
australian capital territory.
upgrade.
number of cells.
couldn't stop playback.
about this application.
although in the three periodic plans of the panchayat regime preference was accorded to agricultural sector for intensification and diversification in crops through reforms in the farming system of this country composed of hamlets and villages, the wide gulf between planning and implementation always led to a negative result.
puerto suárez.
health, social and police services can be financed.
tennessee.
right double angle bracket.
is used to notify that the table column header has changed.
failed to create pipe.
nicaragua.
compress display of addresses in to/cc/bcc to the number specified in addresscount.
insufficient memory to save image into a buffer.
cypriot.
postal services :  till fy 1960/61, the total number of post offices all over the country was 409.
continuing selected path.
the label used for menu items and buttons that activate this action.
indent.
change desktop background.
sign.
distribute baseline anchors of texts horizontally.
it said the programs largely game shows will be provided by its e.c. television unit along with fremantle international a producer and distributor of game shows of which it recently bought 49.
set canvas padding color.
hiroshima.
message has no attachments.
running woman.
please fill in empty pile first.
slower.
error underline color.
remove vertical stripe artifacts from the image.
the amount of space to add on the top and bottom of the widget, in pixels.
the computers were crude by today 's standards.
bopomofo extended.
confirm save.
dealers said most investor interest was focused on defensive blue-chip stocks particularly those with limited u.k. exposure.
to move the whole line.
mouse wheel scrolls by.
fade out.
linear gradient end.
the primary items like raw materials and a few manufactured goods still hold prominence in the country's export trade.
in addition, most of our public infrastructure, public transport and government buildings are not disabled-friendly.
switch to tab 2.
that's because pollination while easy in corn because the carrier is wind is more complex and involves insects as carriers in crops such as cotton.
prompt the user when he or she tries to expunge a folder.
servers.
resource.
tanzania.
the living standard of the people of these regions have adversely affected by the growing disparity of income distribution caused by these factors.
the balance of short positions outstanding fell 159.7 billion yen to 779.8 billion yen.
extent or scope of this document.
hatteras.
the index fell 109.85 monday.
no image.
the bell signaled the beginning of the six week long school holidays.
channelized pipe.
rogers.
mark foreground.
move to workspace up.
high per hectare costs of projects constructed at the government leve1.
menu label.
ask for each message.
the partners said they already hold 15  of all shares outstanding.
average hardware integrity.
date and time.
at since.
whether or not to keep all text in a single paragraph.
cannot join private group.
in the absence of convenient and likelihood of reducing the reliance on traditional sources of energy like forests in the immediate future.
file type.
show contact list.
view help for aisleriot.
im client.
dotted arrow.
avi video.
license.
statusbar.
simulate color distortion produced by a copy machine.
total trade deficit during this period had increased at an average if 16.6 percent per annum due to a limited export base in comparison to import.
video conferencing.
the estimated economic growth rates indicate a progressive upward trend in the rate of growth in the economy.
name or org.
mr. mcgovern himself had said repeatedly that he intended to stay on until he reached the conventional retirement age of 65 in october 1991  unless i get fired.
the gtkadjustment for the vertical position.
apparently the commission did not really believe in this ideal.
top edge.
every $ 15,000 you send will go a long way to boost sagging net worth and employee morale and keep your foster savings institution off the federal budget deficit ! mr. baris is a lawyer in new york.
while many of the risks were anticipated when minneapolis-based cray research first announced the spinoff in may *t*-1 the strings it attached to the financing had n't been made public until yesterday.
context.
youngstown.
move sample point.
add the selected folders to the bookmarks.
system controller.
drawing flame.
it said insurance profit reflected a $ 6 million loss from hurricane hugo.
dia diagram.
the life insurance co. of georgia has officially opened an office in taipei.
thus, at present there is a persistent need for extensive policy reforms and changes.
the treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond gained about a quarter of a point or $ 2.50 for each $ 1,000 of face amount.
sent to calendar as accepted.
inconsistent.
syntax highlighting.
font variant.
target is directory  cannot skip control file check.
andrew derel adams killeen texas fined $ 15,000 ; john francis angier jr. reddington shores fla. $ 15,000 ; mark anthony arlington heights ill. $ 10,000 and 30-day suspension ; william stirlen arlington heights ill. $ 7,500 and 30-day suspension ; fred w. bonnell boulder colo. $ 2,500 and six-month suspension ; michael j. boorse horsham pa. ; david chiodo dallas $ 5,000 barred as a principal ; camille chafic cotran london $ 25,000 ; john william curry fined $ 5,000 ordered to disgorge $ 30,000 one-year suspension.
unselect all.
after the race fortune 500 executives drooled like schoolboys over the cars and drivers.
miscellaneous technical.
due to the distortions arising out of industrial protectionism there could not be created a favourable environment for increasing the investment in nationally imoortant industries related to production, employment and income distribution.
tang pronunciation.
campo grande.
although this rate appears to be fairly high compared to that of other least developed nations, considering that the eighth plan has been initiated at a time when there in a limited capital base, it will be possible to increase the investment at the above mentioned rate.
corpus christi.
linux input event controller.
lock.
sheridan.
collapsed.
shadows.
the 30-year non-callable issue was priced at a spread of 57 basis points above the treasury 's 8 1/8  bellwether long bond.
japanese.
select an image to trace.
ghardaia.
not only can they block wellington from raising money in japan bankers here say but as the largest underwriters in the eurobond market they might be able to scuttle borrowings there too.
track.
click here to select folders to post to.
pascagoula.
allow executing file as program.
osmosis.
couldn't convert filename to utf8.
tab fill.
histogram scale.
meadville.
dodge / burn.
a buffet breakfast was held in the museum where food and drinks are banned to everyday visitors.
as a result, the ration of current account deficit and gdp increased intensely.
mitsubishi estate ended the day at 2680 up 150.
america/inuvik.
in the price situation, the problems of high price rise has not only reduced the competit ive capacity of the economy but also caused greas sufferings to the people.
andalusia.
gore bay.
this will facilitate the further analysis of various aspects of interregional relations in the future.
whether this tag affects the font stretch.
visit the gimp documentation website.
deinterlace.
america/stlucia.
a low savings rate, the increased share of loan in forging assistance, low level of industrialization, weak agricultural production, limited export trade and a high population growth rate remained as barriers in the path of development.
public key file.
in addition, most of us also tend to eat more refined than complex carbohydrates.
while the foreign currency earning in 1990/91 was equivalent to us dollar 56.9 millions, it reached us dollar 62.1 million, going up by 9 percent in 1991/92.
objects to draw flowcharts.
in accordance with the policies of democratic socialism, the formulation of plans will eliminate the top down approach to be replaced by the bottom up approach.
laws and regulations r elating to registration and the structure of nongovernmental organizations will be simplified and in order to make them capable of mobilizing internal resources to a greater extent, necessary improvements will be made in the legal provisions concerning taxation.
expression.
mr. nixon is traveling in china as a private citizen but he has made clear that he is an unofficial envoy for the bush administration.
number  title.
2nd.
optimized.
notification service for activation.
warning too many groups.
number of lines to keep in scrollback.
create a dynamic offset object.
the forest sector became the major source of personal income for the cunning and shrewd people.
the fixed height.
this movement experienced a misfortune when it turned into a process of the selection of workers, replacing the election system, masquerading as unanimity.
login failures maximum latest on.
to educate means, to develop the inherent capacity of the students.
this evaluation version does not allow more than ten users to log in at one time.
install a commandline system.
coverage.
the physical infrastructure in health sector in being gradually developed and a big investment has also been made in the production of health manpower.
baker lake.
view the folders pane.
in a disputed 1985 ruling the commerce commission said commonwealth edison could raise its electricity rates by $ 49 million to pay for the plant.
error generating local time.
exposure program.
save the current archive with a different name.
gray on black.
among other banking issues pennview savings association leapt more than 44  with a gain of 6 5/8 to 21 5/8.
many institutional index funds are active program traders swapping their stocks for futures when profitable to do so.
media contains no supported video streams.
you cannot copy messages from a nntp folder!
america/cordoba.
save custom view.
select region.
no protection.
lossiemouth.
mime type.
coordinate expression doesn't seem to have any operators or operands.
no description available.
completed tasks.
edit bar.
application launcher.
modern manufacturing systems deal with five major areas of production.
in ending hungary 's part of the project parliament authorized prime minister miklos nemeth to modify a 1977 agreement with czechoslovakia which still wants the dam to be built.
rejecting the installation of version.
but justice department and ftc officials said they expect the filing fees to make up for the budget reductions and possibly exceed them.
with a view to eliminating the disparity between investment plan and targets and making the plan more realistic, the plan should frame an investment programme using appropriate techniques, based on the proper assessment of all viable alternatives, similarly, and estimate needs to be made with regard to the availability of resources as well as the growth rate likely to be achieved during the plan period on the basis of alternative sectoral plans.
image thumbnails.
the company said 0 mr. stronach will personally direct the restructuring assisted by manfred gingl president and chief executive.
if not chicago then in new york ; if not the u.s. then overseas.
task preview.
man gold.
copying messages.
job title.
split.
center of flare effect.
but fujitsu japan 's no. 1 computer maker is n't alone.
package download.
japanese.
value for ' set in a readonly source at the front of your configuration path.
cumulative layers combine.
the usx citations represented the first sizable enforcement action taken by osha under mr. scannell.
arizona.
dynamic column header cleared.
there are no signs however of china 's yielding on key issues.
all albums and artists handpicked.
rotate tool rotate the layer, selection or path.
basic.
it was richard nixon 's first visit to china in 1972 that set in motion the historic rapprochement between beijing and washington.
text column.
activate previous document.
intermediate event  multiple.
dull purple.
hit.
application paintable.
more opaque.
profile to use for new terminals.
each piece has curved sides.
one could argue that it is not an assertion of a item veto at all for the president by exerting a power of excision to resist unconstitutional conditions in legislation that violate the separation of powers.
shortcut key with which the snippet is activated.
air transport prior to 1960ad, the country had a total of 12 airfields with 1 metalled and 11 fair weather type.
color noise.
pendleton.
reset private channel.
url already added.
rightpointing arrowhead.
when scoring high first came out in 1979 it was a publication of random house.
translator translators.
keyboard shortcut to switch to the next tab.
in the aftermath of the stock market 's gut-wrenching 190-point drop on oct. 13 kidder peabody & co. 's 1,400 stockbrokers across the country began a telephone and letter-writing campaign aimed at quashing the country 's second-largest program trader.
detached.
system tools.
failed to join chat.
there was and accelerated growth in the expenditure in defence, internal security and debt servicing.
updates.
among the top practitioners were wall street blue bloods : morgan stanley & co. kidder peabody merrill lynch salomon brothers inc. and painewebber group inc.
ogden.
the specified location is invalid.
alabaster.
buddy information.
zoom in or out.
algorithm identifier.
not using locking for read only lock file.
people have to move, inconveniently.
maximum allowed width of the column.
adding key from file.
it is the root cause of many of the existing problems of nepal such as population growth, environmental degradation and social anomalies.
spacing around indicator.
visible.
but that progress was merely limited to quantitative increase.
similarly many cities in the terai are rapidly going through development.
maximum.
invalid tagless entry in style definition group.
importer berkeley mailbox format folders.
applicability.
inverse.
tiksi.
maximum color difference.
unmaximize vertically the window.
detector.
dr. kligman patented the medicine while employed by the university but later licensed the retin-a to a division of johnson & johnson.
paragraph background set.
child process did not give an error message, unknown failure occurred.
visual.
and 8  said export orders were down last month compared with 6  the month before.
selector.
the companies are giving four-day vacations for two to buick buyers who charge all or part of their down payments on the american express green card.
it 's the type of nervous atmosphere in which a report can be put out such as the one saying exports will be suspended and no one can confirm it.
this dialog box lets you select an icon.
to formulate constitution compatible with the norms and values of multi-party democratic system.
although some progress was made in social and physical infrastructural sectors, the progres s appeared remarkable only in comparison to the negligible figures of the base year.
regex match.
many of the letters maintain that investor confidence has been so shaken by the 1987 stock market crash and the markets already so stacked against the little guy that any decrease in information on insider-trading patterns might prompt individuals to get out of stocks altogether.
in view if these facts, the government will abandon the past policies of excessive control and intervention, and adopt open and liberal policies.
switch to.
fears that japanese investors are buying up america have escalated sharply in the past several weeks with sony corp. 's purchase of columbia pictures entertainment inc. from coca-cola co. and mitsubishi estate co. 's acquisition of a 51  holding in rockefeller group the owner of some of midtown manhattan 's most exclusive real estate.
new template.
forward the selected message to someone as an attachment.
you are not currently signed on with an account that can add that buddy.
it 's as if france decided to give only french history questions to students in a european history class and when everybody aces the test *t*-3 they say their kids are good in european history  says john cannell an albuquerque n.m. psychiatrist and founder of an educational research organization friends for education which has studied standardized testing.
moldova.
postscript save cannot handle images with alpha channels.
preliminary tallies by the trade and industry ministry showed another trade deficit in october the fifth monthly setback this year casting a cloud on south korea 's export-oriented economy.
whether to highlight the current line.
undo.
sheldon.
as shown in table 2, the share of agriculture, irrigation and forestry in total investment will reach 25.8 percent.
previously mr. vitulli 43 years old was general marketing manager of chrysler corp. 's chrysler division.
select controller event action.
speedo font.
gencorp tumbled 2 to 14.
current account deficit increased considerably in all three years.
moves left.
reverse order.
robert erwin president of biosource called plant genetic's approach  interesting  and  novel  and  complementary rather than competitive.
mr. rowe also noted that political concerns also worried new england electric.
kirksville.
kenansville.
when the menu is a submenu, position it this number of pixels offset horizontally.
cannot copy messages to the trash folder.
save changed keyboard shortcuts when gimp exits.
restart.
directory.
loop sequence.
huntington.
spacing modifier letters.
left control.
something like one-third of the nation 's 60 largest cities are thinking about new stadiums ranging from cleveland to san antonio and st. petersburg.
full name.
sidebar is visible.
arrangements will be made to avail information relating to groundwater to concerned district development committees, district irrigation offices and other agencies.
the house and senate are divided over whether the united nations population fund will receive any portion of these appropriations but the size of the increase is itself significant.
saved.
some efforts of export promotion and the creation of some institutional bases over the past years helped achieve some success in country-wise diversification of export trade.
thus, the average annual growth in loans and investment during this period was 23.0 percent.
chateau yquem the leading sauternes now goes for well over $ 100 a bottle for a lighter vintage like 1984 ; the spectacularly rich 1983 runs $ 179.
the following packages have unmet dependencies.
tabas.
it employs 2,700 people and has annual revenue of about $ 370 million.
password unchanged.
anniversary.
earlier staff-reduction moves have trimmed about 300 jobs the spokesman said.
visible spacing.
end time.
ixtepec.
saving file ….
attendee.
itaituba.
deselect any selected objects or nodes.
channel independent parameters.
reserved identifier.
weyburn.
unable to determine the peer name.
original author.
display.
lower right.
the results reflected a 24  gain in income from its finance businesses and a 15  slide in income from insurance operations.
your gimp installation is incomplete.
specify a schema file to be installed.
cannot set topic.
alpha value in blended color is not between 0.0 and 1.0.
download in progress. do you want to send the mail?
mrs. gorman took advantage of low prices after the 1987 crash to buy stocks and has hunted for other bargains since the oct. 13 plunge.
ban list.
haines.
the rain had somewhat subsided to a slight drizzle by the time father returned home.
colorcube analysis.
next important message.
show only a box outline of the objects when moving or transforming.
therefore, this plan has placed special emphasis on the awareness creation programmes to increase in the demand for family planning devices.
for japan the controversial trend improves access to american markets and technology.
click or click and drag to continue the path from this point.
agent.
delete stop.
whether this tag affects font scaling.
propagating value channel.
extended address.
to enhance agricultural activities, it was necessary to share information and knowledge in society.
publish as.
style of underline for this text.
vertical parallelogram.
the password for cannot be changed.
unset fill.
the private sector, in a controlled economy, can not invest independently and make decisions concerning primary activities such as production and sale, which tends to direct the flow if investment not towards sustainable area but towards the areas that deliver short-term gains this leads to distortions in economy and the economy lose dynamism causing debility in economic structure.
font style set.
first derivative.
in accordance with the policies of democratic socialism, the formulation of plans will eliminate the top down approach to be replaced by the bottom up approach.
smyrna.
go to parent.
woomera.
sort folders before files.
top watermark.
dropped buffer.
connection error.
with this objective, while special emphasis has been given on the extension of rural roads, due importance has been attached to the provision of facilities like primary heath care, education and drinking water in rural sector.
new memo list.
documents.
received 's public key. your local copy does not match this key. would you still like to accept this public key?
tile spacing.
suppress operations.
the orwellian  new world information order  would give government officials rights against the press ; journalists would be obliged to kowtow to their government which would have licensing and censorship powers and indeed duties to block printing of  wrong  ideas.
reames a maker and marketer of frozen noodles and pre-cooked pasta based in clive iowa has annual sales of about $ 11 million lancaster said.
change all.
europe/tallinn.
type of visualization.
but there still are n't enough ringers to ring more than six of the eight bells.
flow step.
autocrop layer.
keyboard shortcut to toggle the visibility of the menubar.
card games.
key length.
create and modify an archive.
uninterruptible.
liberty national a bank holding company has assets exceeding $ 3 billion.
quicken document.
please check that you are not trying to open a binary file.
has palette.
the new generation of plants will possess the flourishing high-production trait known as  hybrid vigor  similar to that now seen in hybrid corn.
three fourths.
swapon.
japanese money will help turn southeast asia into a more cohesive economic region.
mr. allen 's pittsburgh firm advanced investment management inc. executes program trades for institutions.
mobile equipment.
pen preferences.
print tasks.
albuquerque.
telephony shapes by cisco.
zip/postal code.
statesboro.
diffraction patterns.
sony is paying $ 27 a share or $ 3.55 billion cash and is assuming $ 1.4 billion of long-term debt.
unable to invoke.
provides a variety of ways of notifying you of unread messages.
the desired width of the label, in characters.
the agricultural development also deserves priority as this alone can increase the income of the common people and thereby expand internal maker for industrial sector.
merged ui definition.
softglow.
keep aspect ratio.
örnsköldsvik.
/sort objects/all by type.
rewind the animation.
custom palette.
in addition, the mode of production continued to be traditional.
the net forging assets increased form rs. 6203.5 million in mid july 1989 to rs. 16,150.7 million in mid july 1991.
gravity.
export at current price had increased at an average if 11.2 percent per annum during this period while the import had increased at 14.2percent during the same period.
moreover the electorate would have received a valuable civics lesson in how the separation of powers works in practice.
as it went to the conference panel now deliberating the appropriations bill for the executive office of the president for fiscal 1990 contained some breathtaking attempts by congress to rewrite the constitution under the pretext of protecting the public 's money.
modifying contact from ldap server.
exposure time.
rotate clockwise.
dorothy l. sayers  the nine tailors  aslacton england of all scenes that evoke rural england this is one of the loveliest : an ancient stone church stands amid the fields the sound of bells cascading from its tower calling the faithful to evensong.
execute python.
style scheme search path.
by modification date.
number of columns in a custom game.
show toolbar.
rekindled hope that two new england states will allow broader interstate banking boosted nasdaq 's bank stocks but the over-the-counter market was up only slightly in lackluster trading.
click to dodge.
port scan a network address.
meeting information sent.
the aerospace automotive supply electronics and printing-press concern also indicated that the first half of fiscal 1990 could be rough.
don't resize.
failed to read from temporary file.
options specifying the horizontal behaviour of the child.
underline.
create new document from the default template.
message source.
shaanxi.
toolbar.
open.
birthday.
gnomeentry that the file entry uses for entering filenames. you can use this property to get the gnomeentry if you need to modify or query any of its parameters.
visible operations.
insert new nodes into selected segments.
unknown arrow.
the house has voted to raise the ceiling to $ 3.1 trillion but the senate is n't expected to act until next week at the earliest.
common name.
keyboard shortcuts.
asia/ujungpandang.
the ace of clubs.
icon theme.
while, on the on hand, the government will definitely have to make some harsh decisions, the development perspectives, on the other hand, will need to be compatible with the prevailing national situation and the economic changes in the international scenario.
warning failed to associate schema ' with key '.
find.
create a random cloudlike texture.
pentagon block arrow.
install.
grottaglie.
unmount.
if set, border is always on top of the drawing.
stereotype.
with graphical user interface.
view executable text files when they are opened.
he said the company 's core business remains strong.
out of this, 107kms.
show warning options.
ilhéus.
delete anchors.
huslia.
all tiles.
the nine of diamonds.
set minimum value.
toggles whether the cc field is displayed.
antarctica/mcmurdo.
allergan inc. said it received food and drug administration approval to sell the phacoflex intraocular lens the first foldable silicone lens available for cataract surgery.
unable to read the cdrom database.
welcome.
buddy comment.
blowing dust.
the popt context pointer that gnomeprogram is using.
shelbyville.
horizontal radius of rounded corners.
all active remote folders.
the demise of the 238,000-circulation herald once the nation 's largest afternoon newspaper with circulation exceeding 700,000 turns the country 's second-largest city into a one-newspaper town at least in some senses.
display credits for the creators of nautilus.
friends told her she was pushing too hard.
also ringers do n't always live where the bells need to be rung *-140 like in small rural parishes and inner-city churches.
title for terminal.
nested elements  are not allowed in this context.
today therefore, the facts and the subjects studied are secondary to the development of the child's whole personality.
mr. samnick who will go before the disciplinary panel said the proceedings are unfair and that any punishment from the guild would be unjustified.
signature algorithm unknown.
halmstad.
what is needed is relevant knowledge out of the large information base.
asia/saigon.
the department said it referred the takeover to the monopolies and mergers commission because of the purchase 's possible effects on the u.k. market for distribution of replacement tires.
export.
western gas resources inc. initial offering of 3,250,000 shares of common stock of which 3,040,000 shares will be sold by the company and 210,000 shares by a holder via prudential-bache capital funding smith barney harris upham & co. and hanifen imhoff inc.
he works hard for the whole day and gets back home in the evening.
show options to list windows or workspaces.
lynchburg.
email address.
nissan motor co. japan 's second-largest car maker announced wednesday that the parent concern 's pretax earnings in the first half ended last sept. 30 rose 14  to 88.32 billion yen $ 618.1 million from 77.6 billion yen a year earlier.
save current custom view.
draw.
by.
top padding.
significant progress has been achieved in industry, transport and power.
contact priority.
linköping.
according to news service reports most workers at the disputado mines owned by exxon corp. agreed to a new two-year wage contract that includes a 5  increase and other benefits.
header 6.
the label for the link to the website of the program. if this is not set, it defaults to the url.
browser understands remote.
general options.
curved four point star.
numbered list.
unavailable.
error while parsing optionsrun 'help' to see a full list of available command line options.
but its earnings became a major disappointment as its traditional retail or individual investor business showed no signs of rebounding from the slump that followed the october 1987 stock market crash.
periods before the advent of futures or program trading were often more volatile usually when fundamental market conditions were undergoing change 1973-75 1937-40 and 1928-33 for example.
the three of hearts.
view as a folder.
most manufacturing process involves a large variety of operations.
this name can be set if you want a custom name for the network servers icon on the desktop.
the contra military command in a statement from honduras said sandinista troops had launched a major offensive against the rebel forces.
aggressive.
choose a terminal font.
talara.
juiz de fora.
actions.
backbone.
currency sign.
open layers.
function call.
text entry options.
width of the rendered text.
spell checking.
though legal frameworks were constituted for conservation, promotion and utiliisation of forest during this period, forest protection could not be undertaken in an effective manner due to weak and inefficient implementation.
by extension.
for nearly a decade banks have competed for customers primarily with the interest rates they pay on their deposits and charge on their loans.
the percentage change is since year-end.
plugin.
people who have the legal rights to live in a particular country are its citizens.
oak harbor.
earth which has very clean and attractive nature full of greenery.
maximum recent files.
adjust how much the hue should be changed randomly.
whittier.
asia/vladivostok.
nullsoft video.
slider width.
oral teaching, a time-honored method is still used, but not to the same extent.
ten shirt-sleeved ringers stand in a circle one foot ahead of the other in a prize-fighter 's stance each pulling a rope that disappears through a small hole in the high ceiling of the ringing chamber.
evince.
hours.
total merchant banking exposures are in excess of the firm 's equity.
router subdued.
the number of sizes of brushes to use.
in group.
neuostheim.
the server is unavailable try again later.
redirect.
middle name.
zip code.
despite the harsh exchanges the u.s. and china still seem to be looking for a way to mend relations which have deteriorated into what mr. nixon referred to as  the greatest crisis in chinese-american relations  since his initial visit to china 17 years ago.
information system.
deny.
last year it had to buy sugar on the world market to meet export commitments they noted.
in the public sector, the largest amount was spent on power development.
you cannot group objects that belong to different groups or have different parents.
the following held packages will be changed.
winfield.
no public key was received.
minimize.
failed to create pipe for communicating with child process.
gradient flare editor.
the folder appears to be irrecoverably corrupted.
save input device settings on exit.
would you like to save your changes to this task?
for an american reader part of the charm of this engaging novel should come in recognizing that japan is n't the buttoned-down society of contemporary american lore.
this estimate is based on the assumption that there will be an improvement over the past incremental capital output ration of 4.5:1 to 4.3:1.
must specify one or more directories to dump.
and then this television commercial paid for by republican rudolph giuliani 's campaign and produced by roger ailes the master of negative tv ads really gets down to business.
size of the palette in 8 bit mode.
forbid version.
buy in bulk at a lower price.
government financial situation: 3.1 development expenditure: the total development expenditure stood at rs. 15,979.5 million at current prices in the fiscal year 1990/91.
campbell soup for one is furious its souper combo microwave product was chastised in the premiere  in the dumpster  column.
termination signal.
whether the selection should follow the pointer.
alternative port number.
about 30  of ratners 's profit already is derived from the u.s.
resist.
although the growth rate of this sector in general has been marginally higher the that of the economy as a whole, some industrial units prospered as a result of protectionist policies.
the railway trains too leave their mark of sound all the way they travel.
if enabled, the move tool sets the edited layer or path as active. this used to be the default behaviour in older versions.
in the absence of survey and studies of natural recourses, agricultural output national income and other economic variables, existing economic conditions could not be accurately ascertained.
many rivers flow through more than one country, that lying higher up the river having the whip-hand.
unable to send data to child, invalid charset convertor.
protocol not supported.
in this context, the foreign exchange should be utilized positively and productively in order to increase productivity and employment opportunities in the economy.
however well intentioned food transfers have the habit of growing larger and wrecking the market incentives for the recipient country 's own farmers.
favorite things.
current pcs are more than 50 times faster and have memory capacity 500 times greater than their 1977 counterparts.
invalid file.
block 7.
your password has expired.
couldn't allocate memory for context buffer.
uri.
invalid home phone.
override document restrictions.
menus have icons.
guadalajara.
asia/muscat.
authors.
it is expected that common shares equal to the number of units outstanding about 108 million on sept. 30 will be issued during the first quarter of 1990.
selects if the resulting image should be seamlessly tileable.
value of the progress bar.
error renaming file to.
requested mail action not taken mailbox unavailable.
file type.
office applications.
this has had detrimental effects on environmental balance as well as agricultural production.
-lrb- freddie mac -rrb- : posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days.
the telephone line and population ration stood at 1:290 by january 1991 with the distribution of 65,298 telephone lines in 38 urban areas.
the asbestos fiber crocidolite is unusually resilient once it enters the lungs with even brief exposures to it causing symptoms that show up decades later researchers said.
paper tile.
create an embossing effect using a bump map.
the contribution of taxes to gdp stood at 2.3 percent at constant prices from indirect taxes and 0.8 percent from direct taxes in 1972/73, which rose to 4.0 percent and 0.9 percent respectively in 1989/90.
dark green.
the default width of the window, used when initially showing the window.
they can be detrimental to health in the long run.
you have to specify an archive name.
downloads.
western.
but he has not said before that the country wants half the debt forgiven.
dependency handling.
average maturity of the funds ' investments lengthened by a day to 41 days the longest since early august according to donoghue 's.
parameters.
forward contact.
none.
template class.
write.
foreground color.
continue.
heptagon. seven sided shape.
width of a tab character expressed in spaces.
administration.
their report appears in today 's issue of the journal nature.
one moment please.
error  converting data for child, dropping.
mount.
user interface.
compose channels.
whether buttons for creating/manipulating files should be displayed.
the angle of the pen's nib in degrees 0  horizontal has no effect if fixation  0.
lakeview.
the department said orders for nondurable goods those intended to last fewer than three years fell 0.3  in september to $ 109.73 billion after climbing 0.9  the month before.
this object has no defaults.
/options/show timestamps.
fixed width.
perpignan.
error during conversion.
kunming.
in may the two companies through their jointly owned holding company temple offered $ 50 a share or $ 777 million for sea containers.
contiguous.
document ended unexpectedly with elements still open  was the last element opened.
some of his observations about japanese management style are on the mark.
failed to find a valid file for theme.
in such areas, the emphasis will mainly be laid on cereal production.
provides.
possible values are "single" to launch files on a single click, or "double" to launch them on a double click.
move anchors.
sumitomo metal mining fell five yen to 692 and nippon mining added 15 to 960.
entire document selected.
scripts.
to hold general elections in accordance with the constitution.
paging.
lytton.
sulphur springs.
there were office and factory workers going to their places of work.
america/danmarkshavn.
patna.
muktinath is a sacred place for hindus as well as buddhists.
multiple instance.
the four of diamonds.
czech republic.
the present government now has to undertake the responsibility of achieving the economic disorder and distortions of the past.
hardware address.
received bytes.
language object to get highlighting patterns from.
whether to scroll to the bottom when there's new output.
style of bevel around the menubar.
skip tasklist.
each tool may store its own style to apply to the newly created objects. use the button below to set it.
rendering sphere.
object details.
the government already buffeted by high interest rates and a slowing economy has been badly hurt by last week 's shake-up in mrs. thatcher 's cabinet.
the chicago mercantile exchange a major futures marketplace yesterday announced the addition of another layer of trading halts designed to slow program traders during a rapidly falling stock market and the big board is expected today to approve some additional restrictions on program trading.
select text color.
new passwords do not match.
waterbury.
network management.
update.
unsupported public key type.
portable network graphics.
transparency indicator.
view packages that it is recommended that you install.
you have been disconnected from chat room.
thus, the trade deficit which increased by 26.0 percent in 1990/92 declined to 14.6 percent in 1991/92.
current document.
invalid header in animation.
sarakhs.
to promote regional balance, special grants will be made available during the eighth plan for specific projects on addition to the lump sum government grants to the regions.
reliance confirmed the filing but would n't elaborate.
some of the newer wines even at $ 90 to $ 100 a bottle or so almost offer a bargain.
configure defaults for gstreamer applications.
the minimum value of the adjustment.
delete the podcast episode and downloaded file?
appending to selected path.
metlakatla.
move down.
kerman.
ukiah.
in that case he might receive an opinion from the court that is a vindication of the president 's right to perform the duties and exercise the prerogatives the framers thought should be entrusted to the executive.
spin.
the chicago merc plans an additional  circuit breaker  to stem sharp drops in the market.
moves flat review to the word below the current word.
key strength bits.
maple creek.
locations.
this event has been changed.
this drop target only supports local files.
move tool.
connected.
align all visible layers of the image.
the exchange said it decided a new circuit breaker was needed following a review of the tumultuous trading in stocks and stock-index futures on friday oct. 13 when the dow jones industrials plunged 190 points and stock-index futures prices skidded as well.
whether the action group is enabled.
set the height.
area list.
show archive properties.
cook islands.
empathy should reduce the location's accuracy.
failed to locate node in its hash bucket.
images.
signing certificate not trusted.
there are ten heritages of nepal that are listed in the world heritage list.
adds mitsui 's mr. klauser :  unlike corporations in this country trading companies are n't so much interested in a high return on investment as they are on increasing trade flows.
cumberland.
the insta11 at, on of the tubewells will be gradually be transferred from the government to the private sector.
just because a crosswalk looks like a hopscotch board doesn't mean it is one.
start date.
couldn't rebuild package cache.
pushbutton command.
other rumored takeover and restructuring candidates to attract buyers included woolworth which went up 1 3/4 to 59 1/2 ; avon products up 1 3/4 to 29 1/4 ; paramount communications up 2 to 57 7/8 and ferro up 2 5/8 to 28 3/4.
text file.
error setting value for '.
choose terminal text color.
during the three decades of the panchayat regime, there was never a dearth of attractive fundamental reform programmes and slogans.
past development efforts, achievements and constraints.
could not create peruser dia config directory.
unable to remove directory.
the turf recently has ranged from chile to austria to portugal.
the second section index which added 6.84 points tuesday was up 5.92 points or 0.16  to close at 3648.82.
even with mutual funds the little investor continues to tolerate high fees high commissions and poor performance while index-fund managers slowly amass a better record with lower fees lower commissions and less risk.
ip address.
diagram tree window.
with source image.
the finding probably will support those who argue that the u.s. should regulate the class of asbestos including crocidolite more stringently than the common kind of asbestos chrysotile found in most schools and other buildings dr. talcott said.
a well-educated mother can give a good environment to her child for well growth and for better education.
create and delete files.
lentjes had 1988 sales of 800 million marks $ 434.4 million and has a current order backlog of 2.5 billion marks.
tree table.
thus, the doctor-partient ration and the hospital bed- population ration reached 1:15, 800 and 1:3,967 respectively.
output levels.
circuit.
framerate.
groningen.
la tuque.
take lake vineyard cabernet from diamond creek.
even row color.
no preview.
during these years, the share of small and cottage industries in gross domestic product remained around 1 percent.
profile.
stephen salmore a political scientist at new jersey 's eagleton institute says it 's another example of an ad that 's true but not fully accurate.
must be run from a terminal.
aborted parsing.
clickdrag to add a new point.
enable arrow keys.
cancel the installation of.
widestriped.
the reason : the refusal of congress to give federal judges a raise.
could not change nick.
create new window.
no more solutions.
mark manual.
enter password.
subtitle encoding.
the color profile used for simulating a printed version softproof.
authenticating.
could not create peruser gnome configuration directory '.
unsupported security layer.
choose a folder.
gradient editor.
raise selected object to top.
could not display help.
thus, the essential and effective prerequisites for national development, peopleâ€™s participation and peopleâ€™s labour contribution, could not be utilized for sustainable development orientated to peopleâ€™s welfare.
if the insertion cursor is shown.
network devices not found.
process type reference.
the inputtoken contains different channel bindings to those specified via the inputchanbindings parameter.
the firm and mr. whelen allegedly sold securities to the public at unfair prices among other alleged violations.
please enter an alias, and the appropriate information about the chat you would like to add to your buddy list.
elizabeth city.
save.
iterations.
relative move.
retrieving buddy list.
unesco somehow converted the founding u.n. ideals of individual rights and liberty into  peoples ' rights.
human readable name of this application.
marcus bains line color  time bar.
biggin hill.
while planning any irrigation project, users will be involved in every step right from project initiation.
archive.
accordingly, the available statistics shows that 5,424, 000 and 1,134,000 residents of the rural and  urban areas respectively had access to the drinking water facility.
if a veto is unworkable because it would leave part of the executive branch unfunded the president could sign the appropriations bills into law and assert a power of excision declaring the rider restricting his article ii powers to be unconstitutional and severable.
therefore, it is necessary to give special emphasis on the mobilisation of internal resources.
rectangle select.
radio.
add buddy to your list?
therefore, the extent if requisite investment of the plan was fixed on the basis of crude incremental capital output ratios.
fatal parse error in brush file  height  0.
oujda.
5.make a lasting difference in the regulatory life of an american savings-and-loan association through the foster corporate parents plan.
while the contribution of the cottage industry to the gross domestic produce was 1.4 pecent in  fy 1974/75, this declined to 0.7 percent in 1989/90.
decompose.
policies will be continued to be effectively implemented so as to induce the domestic and foreign investors to increases their investment with confidence and to generate higher returns as cooperated to the rate of investment.
therefore, it is necessary to pay attention to the task of constructing link road to district headquarters and other feeder roads on the basis of economic feasibility studies and also to the repairs and maintenance of old roads.
xft antialias.
remove contact.
new secure shell key.
you already have a profile called.
show rulers.
continued export demand also supported prices.
i live in hopes that the ringers themselves will be drawn into that fuller life.
rise time.
similarly, another policy allowed a 80 percent interest waiver at prevalent rates of interest to the economically deprived sections in the rural area for income generating employment activities on a loan of upto rs. 2,500 procured for the spinning wheel and wool for carpet industry, handichafts, smallscale mills, small farming enterprises etc.
secure internet live conferencing silc protocol.
contents background color.
system policy prevents querying package system lock.
map to box.
mount on.
all types.
displace pixels as indicated by displacement maps.
download.
stockholm.
user is too active.
show offline contacts.
but equitable said it was unable to find a buyer willing to pay what it considers *t*-2  fair value  for younkers because of recent turmoil in the bond and stock markets and in retailing.
on workspace.
failed.
add files.
we are able to increase our price above the $ 70 level if necessary.
barrow.
getting group memberships.
????????
the real difference seems to be that the cash market here  is big enough and liquid enough that the futures market is n't having the same impact it does in america.
to offset the reduction congress approved a $ 20,000 fee that investors and companies will have to pay each time they make required filings to antitrust regulators about mergers acquisitions and certain other transactions.
there are no smiles about this bill  rep. pat williams d. mont said during house floor debate yesterday.
la grande.
all text files.
the school-board hearing at which she was dismissed was crowded with students teachers and parents who came to testify on her behalf.
bandar 'abbas.
verifying is not supported by this cipher.
she was an unstinting teacher who won laurels and inspired students but she will probably never teach again.
and the firms are stretching their nets far and wide to do it.
photoshop document.
america/anguilla.
searching by date.
lens flare.
redo the undone action.
removal of unnecessary delays to accelerate the government of government policies, and c.
similarly, the trade deficit with india has increased on account of the increased import of manufactured items from india in comparison to the export of traditional agro based and unprocessed products to that country.
can't connect to session manager!
ralston said its restructuring costs include the phase-out of a battery facility in greenville n.c. the recent closing of a hostess cake bakery in cincinnati and a reduction in staff throughout the company.
sync.
mahjongg.
unfortunately japanese manufacturers have neither good working conditions nor good compensation packages.
couldn't read color.
empathy can use the gps to guess the location.
different shapes of dress add charm to the personality of different persons.
the economic growth rate is low and it is essential to bring about qualitative reforms in the economic structure in order to achieve a sustainable and long lasting growth rate.
always on visible workspace.
includes gmail, google docs, google, youtube and picasa.
use case.
the optimum utilization of regionally available means and resources will also enhance the national.
dia input.
or as dorothy arighi an interior decorator in arnold calif. puts it :  all kinds of funny things spook the market these days.
similarly, imports from other countries increased to rs. 21,135.4 million in 1991/92 from rs. 16,425.5 millions in 1990/91.
africa/freetown.
align.
random with equal weights.
cyrillic supplement.
rays paint options.
packets received.
search backwards.
torreon.
no matches.
package name has characters that aren't lowercase alphanums or '.
time has expired.
unable to open file.
by copyright.
horizontal adjustment for the widget.
anápolis.
in addition the apple ii was an affordable $ 1,298.
invalid contact.
as part of the planning and implementation processes programmes will be implemented with the objective of benefiting the population living below the poverty line.
detach.
expand all message threads.
info for.
many people believe that money is the root of all evil.
spell checker.
in every major market in the u.s. for instance you can buy '86 la tache or richebourg virtually all of the first growth bordeaux except petrus as well as opus one and dominus from california and at the moment the stag 's leap 1985 cask 23.
the following were barred or where noted suspended and consented to findings without admitting or denying wrongdoing : edward l. cole jackson miss. $ 10,000 fine ; rita rae cross denver $ 2,500 fine and 30-day suspension ; thomas richard meinders colorado springs colo. $ 2,000 fine five-day suspension and eight-month suspension as a principal ; ronald a. cutrer baton rouge la. $ 15,000 fine and one-month suspension ; karl grant hale midvale utah $ 15,000 fine ; clinton p. hayne new orleans $ 7,500 fine and one-week suspension ; richard m. kane coconut creek fla. $ 250,000 fine ; john b. merrick aurora colo. $ 1,000 fine and 10-day suspension ; john p. miller baton rouge $ 2,000 fine and two-week suspension ; randolph k. pace new york $ 10,000 fine and 90-day suspension ; brian d. pitcher new providence n.j. $ 30,000 fine ; wayne a. russo bridgeville pa. $ 4,000 fine and 15-day suspension ; orville leroy sandberg aurora colo. $ 3,500 fine and 10-day suspension ; richard t. marchese las vegas nev. $ 5,000 and one-year suspension ; eric g. monchecourt las vegas $ 5,000 and one-year suspension ; and robert gerhard smith carson city nev. two-year suspension.
style of bevel around the toolbar.
illegal variable name in environment file.
redraw preview.
kings audience.
select a card from the reserve for first foundation pile.
a record date hasn't been set.
background opacity of exported bitmap either 0.0 to 1.0, or 1 to 255.
template.
for years this group included a stable of classics bordeaux first growths lafite-rothschild latour haut-brion petrus grand cru burgundies romanee-conti and la tache deluxe champagnes dom perignon or roederer cristal rarefied sweet wines chateau yquem or trockenbeerenauslesen rieslings from germany and biondi-santi brunello riserva from tuscany.
diamond mine.
nevertheless said brenda malizia negus editor of money fund report yields  may blip up again before they blip down  because of recent rises in short-term interest rates.
settings.
red deer.
nawabshah.
earlier, transfer and exchange of information were done orally.
drumheller.
version table.
completed.
africa/ndjamena.
title  status.
key.
mostly she says she wanted to prevent the damage to self-esteem that her low-ability students would suffer from doing badly on the test.
didn't understand ' pair must end with a.
cannot operate on indexed color images.
take a screenshot of the entire screen.
several programmes have been initiated to include the rural sector in the main stream of development.
keywords.
equally infested by noise are the areas by the side of a busy railway track.
crossfade duration seconds.
even some members of the old guard despite their current advantage seem to be conceding that the future belongs with the new guard.
could not delete the old archive.
other countries including west germany may have a hard time justifying continued membership.
please fill in all text fields.
but you have to recognize that these events took place 35 years ago.
buddy comment.
vladivostok.
groupwise home screen name 2.
key agreement failed.
error uncatching signal.
configure extended input devices.
yijing hexagram symbols.
go to the home location.
contributions.
because of budget constraints in washington the u.s. encourages japan to share economic burdens in the region.
empty.
undo move.
option pane.
as sent folder for wide view.
special country confidential.
keyboard shortcut to close a window.
linux input events.
whether the window buttons should be visible.
such research may ultimately result in the ability to regenerate damaged tissues or to turn off genes that cause cancer  or to regulate genes that cause down 's syndrome the leading cause of mental retardation according to an nih summary.
millimeter.
cancel sample point.
foreign exchange situation the policy of partial convertibility in foreign exchange was adopted since 4th march 1992.
set to true to be able to mark squares as unknown.
college station.
magenta.
any category.
the decision to make the bid for nekoosa for example was made only after all six members of georgia-pacific 's management committee signed onto the deal even though mr. hahn knew he wanted to go after the company early on says mr. correll.
africa/maputo.
america/pangnirtung.
due to this excess liquidity in the economy, while there has been a great pressure on price situation, the ration between gross domestic product and current account deficit has remained very high 9.7 percent.
this situation has led to many undesirable consequences.
after a stronger-than-expected pace early this year analysts say the market after a series of sharp swings in recent months now shows signs of retreating.
switch to tab 1.
insert smiley.
command disabled.
bangladesh.
email begins with.
in heavy trading on the new york stock exchange campbell 's shares rose $ 3.375 to close at $ 47.125.
resize/move the selected partition.
row.
one main importance is that the world’s best books are written in the english language.
querying new plugins.
it is because of the importance of forests that they should be preserved.
america/yellowknife.
leading.
disabled.
jay goldinger with capital insight inc. reasons that while the mark has posted significant gains against the yen as well the mark climbed to 77.70 yen from 77.56 yen late tuesday in new york the strength of the u.s. bond market compared to its foreign counterparts has helped lure investors to dollar-denominated bonds rather than mark bonds.
it is a lucrative profession too.
the productivity, thus decreased by a rate of 0.1 percent.
the radio action whose group this action belongs to.
controlled economic policed pursued by the panchayat regime in the past have given rise to distortions in the industrial structure as they promoted industrial and commercial activities which did not enhance any significant price value at the processing stage but were only profitable in the highly protected indian market.
failed to remove lock file '.
miss.
photo manager.
the tire maker said the buildings consist of 1.8 million square feet of office manufacturing and warehousing space on 353 acres of land.
whether the text can be modified by the user.
the plan relies heavily on $ 240 million in credit and loan guarantees in fiscal 1990 in hopes of stimulating future trade and investment.
vertical adjustment for the widget.
wrap mode set.
keybinding to activate the menu bar.
list of the ids of the available style schemes.
start markers.
custom.
became unidle.
allow other users to view your desktop.
to profit from an index-arbitrage opportunity someone who owns the s&p 500 widget in new york must sell it and replace it with a cheaper s&p 500 widget in chicago.
the bells tied around their necks produce a sweet jingle.
mr. ridley 's announcement set off a howl of protests from members of the opposition labor party who accused the thatcher administration of backing down on promised protection for a privatized company.
you have made changes. forget those changes and update the editor?
america/fortaleza.
the ssh command was terminated unexpectedly.
start date.
sustainable economic growth b.
mandelbrot.
pixels inside wrap.
paste width separately.
keyboard settings….
stepper spacing.
the causes of disaster, whether natural or man-made, can never be completely eliminated.
by 1961 1,452,000 gallons of water per day was available to 6 percent of the population.
using cdrom mount point.
list of authors of the program.
the treasury said the u.s. will default on nov. 9 if congress does n't act by then.
scrollbar spacing.
predefined variable.
hearne.
underlined.
the proposed size of total investment and its sectoral allocation patterns will primarily contribute to the increase in the aggregate and secotral production growth rates.
undo actions limit deprecated.
unknown file type.
require the user to enter this password.
double click time.
amr climbed 1 3/4 to 73 1/8 amid rumors that new york developer donald trump was seeking financing to mount a new lower offer for the parent company of american airlines.
open link in browser.
first commonwealth securities corp. of new orleans and its president kenneth j. canepa also of new orleans consented to a $ 10,000 fine.
realaudio document.
error unsetting.
colorize the image.
calendar uri.
market facilities will be intensively improved in order to aid the convenient supply of necessary agricultural inputs as well as the sale and purchase of surplus agricultural produce.
under terms of the spinoff cray research stockholders are to receive one cray computer share for every two cray research shares they own in a distribution expected to occur in about two weeks.
invalid archive signature.
prudential-bache securities boosted the stock 's short-term investment rating in response to the departure ; analyst john mcmillin said he believes the company will turn to new management  that 's more financially oriented.
secret special country.
/conversation/insert link.
read error.
task information.
aspect ratio.
open the brush selection dialog.
concomitantly with the decentralization of authority, the local bodies will be motivated to bear responsibilities.
x position.
accessible role.
foreground color as a possibly unallocated gdkcolor.
unexpected server response from xover.
playback.
reply too big.
furthermore, the achievement of the above growth rate alone will ensure additional advantages to the economy and provide a sound basis for further accelerated economic growth rate and an increase in additional employment opportunities in future.
working.
maringá.
keyboard shortcut to make font larger.
pause.
asia/riyadh.
south  southeast.
abrupt departures are n't unheard of within the newhouse empire.
automatically start speaking a page when it is first loaded.
script.
domestic sales of construction machinery such as power shovels and bulldozers rose to 142.84 billion yen from 126.15 billion yen.
corruption is taken as a major social problem because the corrupt people misuse the public fund and hinder the development of the nation.
however, the public sector undertakings appeared to have received less bank credit disbursement in mid july 1991.
light rain.
rescan for fractals.
slice the image into subimages using guides.
structure.
extract.
from gradient.
madrid.
but as they hurl fireballs that smolder rather than burn and relive old duels in the sun it's clear that most are there to make their fans cheer again or recapture the camaraderie of seasons past or prove to themselves and their colleagues that they still have it or something close to it.
sending cookie.
wrap around.
ignore case.
transformation on unloaded image.
cisco  network.
apply filters.
defaults.
compact flash drive.
recommends.
named as defendants were roland matthews president and peter jonas executive vice president and chief financial officer as well as a former plant manager.
never.
for help contact your system adminstrator or the administrator of the key server.
configure this tab.
invite buddy into chat room.
organization.
judges are not getting what they deserve.
in the same vein, it is necessary to develop and extend small irrigation systems that conform to the country's physiographic and cause minimum adverse impact on the environment.
the size of the issue was increased from an originally planned $ 500 million.
the market also moved at early afternoon on news that jaguar shares were being temporarily suspended at 746 pence -lrb- $ 11.80 -rrb- each.
please export the diagram as a shape.
unknown action type.
america/goosebay.
green on black.
nordic.
texas instruments japan ltd. a unit of texas instruments inc. said it opened a plant in south korea to manufacture control devices.
considering the above problems, necessary measures will be taken to complete the irrigation projects within the allocated time during the eighth plan period.
but rep. don edwards d. calif responded that a recession could stifle merger activity reducing the amount of fees collected.
it is going to be real tight.
mark as seen after specified timeout.
share my music.
forest determination took place intensively during this period.
paths.
open the selected messages in the composer for editing.
mask file.
just create key.
there are many more instances of wars.
such reactions decide the response of our body to sound.
resolution.
tacoma.
in a recent report moody 's said it  expects intense competition to occur through the rest of the century in the securities industry which combined with overcapacity will create poor prospects for profitability.
similarly, the school-student ration of 1:46 in  1961, recorded a significant increase to 1:156 by april 1990.
send an email.
height of the rendered text.
type.
remove the twos.
vertical space between cells. must be an even number.
europe/amsterdam.
sendai.
select.
used for converting to lossless voicequality audio. use this for recording and editing speech.
no fill.
last year 's figures include a one-time loss of $ 12 million for restructuring and unusual items.
the national education plan (1971-75) was announced on april 16, 1971 claiming that the education system prior to the advent of the panchayat system was not in keeping with the country, time and the nepalese society.
font stretch set.
ocean city.
the rate of growth in deficit financing from 1972/73 to 1989/90 was 18.4 percent at current prices and 7.9 percent at 1972/73 constant prices.
the security system in the country should be very good.
speaker without amplifier.
autodetect.
luminosity frequency.
cancel operation.
but for the next few months these boys of summers long past are going to be reveling in an indian summer of the soul.
the program not only offers a pre-approved car loan up to $ 18,000 but throws in a special cash-flow statement to help in saving money.
magnatune.
security context.
distribute bottoms of targets.
arcrole.
an attempted buy-out led by john j. mccabe chief operating officer never materialized and a stream of what one staff member dismissed as  tire-kickers and lookee-loos  had filed through since.
create a status widget.
timimoun.
on the phone.
pattern.
pacific/guadalcanal.
title for the browse file dialog.
the drug was approved by the food and drug administration and marketed by some 300 pharmaceutical companies often under generic labels.
block user.
click to create preview.
service unavailable.
centerbank added 5/8 to 8 3/4 ; shares of nesb a new london-based bank holding company rose 5/8 to 5 7/8.
if unchecked the image will be circularly mapped onto a rectangle. if checked the image will be mapped onto a circle.
the capacity utilization of jute goods and beer industries was above 70 percent.
you cannot receive buddy notifications until you import his/her public key. you can use the get public key command to get the public key.
desktop integration.
the flow of japanese funds has set in motion  a process whereby these economies will be knitted together by the great japanese investment machine  says robert hormats vice chairman of goldman sachs international corp.
coordinate expression contains character which is not allowed.
there are not enough layers to align.
failed to fetch.
the average household will spread 19 accounts over a dozen financial institutions  says michael p. sullivan who runs his own bank consulting firm in charlotte n.c.
thus, despite the intention of developing the nation rapidly through the utilization of planning as a development tool, the economy could not achieve the desired progress.
atsushi muramatsu executive vice president and chief financial officer of nissan said  the company has experienced a remarkable turnaround in terms of profitability since the fiscal year ending march 1987 when the sharp and rapid appreciation of the yen caused many difficulties.
let the value brightness of the region determine the size of the stroke.
say all by.
advanced search.
let the direction from the center determine the size of the stroke.
all gray.
gparted.
inyokern.
error changing fields.
the default color may only be used as a background.
in a number of recent cases federal courts have refused to recognize attorneys ' assertions that information relating to fees from clients should be confidential.
responsibility.
oil painting.
configuration file ', does not exist on system. installing new config file as you requested.
how far in the x direction to move the arrow when the button is depressed.
standard unix mbox spool file.
mode  by.
and  scale by.
pixel height.
edit properties of this document to be saved with the document.
finger.
kodiak.
play a sound when a contact logs in.
filter rules.
despite one of the most devastating droughts on record net cash income in the farm belt rose to a new high of $ 59.9 billion last year.
save details.
america/noronha.
select folder to save search in.
norway.
the 7.40  term bonds due 2009 are priced to yield 7.45  and 7.40  term bonds due 2017 are priced to yield 7.50.
to the astonishment and dismay of her superiors and legal authorities and perhaps as a measure of the unpopularity of standardized tests mrsyeargin won widespread local support.
in a second area of common concern the world environment an additional $ 15 million will be provided in development assistance to fund a series of initiatives related both to global warming and the plight of the african elephant.
queue all tracks.
backing evolution data mails, contacts, calendar, tasks, memos.
provo.
in this connection, the plan has given special emphasis to a more rational allocation of resources, better management of public expenditures, enhanced mobilization of internal resources, greater performance in public sector investment and the strengthening of public enterprises, open and simple foreign exchange policies and regulations, and prudent fiscal and monetary policies.
dollar : 143.80 yen up 0.95 ; 1.8500 marks up 0.0085.
file system root.
corsicana.
show messages with all email headers.
if set to true, then nautilus will have a feature allowing you to delete a file immediately and inplace, instead of moving it to the trash. this feature can be dangerous, so use caution.
if set to true, newly opened windows will have the side pane visible.
for this purpose, the budgetary allocation of funds for rural development will be increased to seventy percent of the total development budget outlay.
separately the federal energy regulatory commission turned down for now a request by northeast seeking approval of its possible purchase of ps of new hampshire.
logging in.
3.2 communication a.
an error occurred while adding files to the archive.
align.
could not remove color scheme.
window manager warning.
file name.
text entry to input date.
belo horizonte.
mnemonic widget.
zoom tool adjust the zoom level.
experts say that pets are very therapeutic and can even prolong the lives of human being.
mr. kuehn the company said will retain the rest of the current management team.
changing shortcut failed.
explosives the estimated demand for explosives during the eighth plan period is 1,400 metric tons.
users on.
could not delete.
emboss.
signal.
currently margins on stock futures purchases are much lower roughly 7  compared with 50  for stocks making the futures market much faster and potentially more speculative.
a planned third ship still may be built in the finnish shipyard or may be built elsewhere carnival said.
whether we have a valid maximum zoom level.
optical crossconnect.
folders.
print setup.
move up one.
enter the new package tree limit.
failure authentication failed.
miles city.
the company said the one-time provision would substantially eliminate all future losses at the unit.
x pad.
set the calendar year.
couldn't write file.
alltel corp. said it will acquire the 55  of pond branch telephone company inc.'s cellular franchise that it doesn't own already.
use theme for chat rooms.
no existing object to paste.
workspace.
the printing system did not report any additional details about the error.
as regards the trade structure of import, the shares of foods and raw materials, industrial goods and other materials in the total import in fy 1961/62 were 39.9 percent, 59.5 percent and 0.8 percent respectively.
songea.
indian/mayotte.
liberal policies aimed at attracting more tourists have also been adopted to encourage the services of foreign airlines.
little falls.
disable sounds when away.
left padding.
configure the selected controller.
show statusbar.
background.
get info.
packages being held back these packages could be upgraded, but you have asked for them to be held at their current version.
highest.
leave fullscreen.
the company has reported declines in operating profit in each of the past three years despite steady sales growth.
color profile is not for rgb color space.
email 4.
acute accent.
error joining chat.
late that afternoon the s&p 500 stock-index futures contract fell a total of 30 index points hitting a merc circuit breaker limit that remained in effect for the rest of the trading session.
transparency.
spacing between buttons.
search folders.
irassharedata inc. said it will amend a registration statement filed with the securities and exchange commission to delete a plan to sell 500,000 newly issued common shares.
shade factor in shaded color is negative.
preview size.
confidential.
this market 's still going through its pains  said philip puccio head of equity trading at prudential-bache securities.
the title of the selection dialog box.
lannion.
they will mature dec. 21.
attachment.
martinsburg.
threshold.
kraków.
change.
spouse.
takeover experts said they doubted the financier would make a bid by himself.
question.
copy.
input methods.
the loan disbursement ration of the commercial banks which stood at 60.6 percent in june/july 1962, steadily rose to 70.1 percent in june/july 1990.
if they approach it with a benevolent altruistic attitude there will be a net gain for everyone.
height of board.
ratners group plc a fast-growing acquisition-minded london-based jeweler raised its price for seattle-based specialty jeweler weisfield 's inc. to $ 57.50 a share or $ 62.1 million from $ 50 a share or $ 55 million after another concern said it would be prepared to outbid ratners 's initial offer.
among other connecticut banks whose shares trade in the otc market society for savings bancorp based in hartford saw its stock rise 1 3/4 to 18 1/4.
verilog source code.
audio files.
go.
therefore, no satisfactory achievement could be made in the economic sector.
it 's interesting to find that a lot of the expensive wines are n't always walking out the door.
the overpopulation led kathmandu to become what it is now, a dust bowl.
lift irrigation powered by electricity, biogas and wind wi11 be encouraged where feasible power in order to reduce dependence on imported fuel.
following the introduction of the new policy in 1992, approval has been granted by mid june to a remarkable number of industries seeking registration.
desktop link.
normally closed contact vertical.
the flags to use for popt.
deform amount.
randoms from seed.
forget password immediately.
dauphin.
crop.
test integrity.
stepped out.
snap to grid.
move pixels around randomly.
to purge packages.
foreground color.
continue with the installation.
beaumont.
decrease the speed of the animation.
do you want to ignore this warning and proceed anyway?
the real battle is over who will control that market and reap its huge rewards.
invalid string in environment.
corner 1.
arbitrage simply transfers his selling pressure from chicago to new york while functioning as a buyer in chicago.
indent on tab.
europe/vilnius.
however, the present population of the country is already placing excessive demands on existing resources.
highlight current line.
odiham.
florennes.
saratov.
fork failed.
convert a mitered join to a bevelled join if the miter would extend to a distance of more than miterlimit  linewidth from the actual join point.
time in milliseconds between updates of the graphs.
use subcolors.
this will assist in the assessment of the probable effects of alternative investment programmes on medium term economic growth and short term economic stability.
select swap folder.
unexpected end of line in package name at line.
browse the file system with the file manager.
nonmatching hosts.
changed line.
georgia gulf rebuffed that offer in september and said it would study other alternatives.
however, while it was predestined that there would be no going â€˜back to the villageâ€™ without the decentralization of power, the construction of infrastructure for rural development and the creation of employment opportunities, this genuine movement instead if being utilized in development programmes was developed into a system of political evaluation of panchayat workers and a means of orienting them towards position of pow3er.
preferences.
version.
santa monica.
quesnel.
underline.
file roller.
system sheet.
cities and urban areas act as engine for growth in terms of production and market or service centers.
couldn't read polyline info.
template parse error.
open mail.
channel founder on is.
sound  video.
leuchars.
dow jones which owns about 64 million of telerate 's 95 million common shares outstanding said that about 24,000 shares have been tendered under its offer.
couldn't display help.
create a new memo list.
for all the furor there is nothing particularly complex about the concept of stock-index arbitrage the most controversial type of computer-assisted program trading.
what 's more the test and learning materials are both produced by the same company macmillan/mcgraw-hill a joint venture of mcgraw-hill inc. and macmillan 's parent britain 's maxwell communication corp.
invitation to conversation.
old italic.
aspect ratio.
on hold.
if you look at the third quarter as posting roughly 2.5  growth i do see some slowing in the fourth quarter  agrees kansas city fed president roger guffey.
points.
in most nations, the minimum voting age is set at eighteen years.
add to play queue.
desktop cutting plotter.
select all files.
absolute end gap.
mrs. yeargin concedes that she went over the questions in the earlier class adding :  i wanted to help all  students.
the rise in the stock 's price may also reflect the fact that usx 's steel segment fared better than some other steelmakers '.
select check box.
invalid response please enter one of the following commands.
registration error.
width of selection.
the leading language of international conference, technology, computers, commerce, employment, etc.
his duties as chief executive will be assumed by chairman jay b. langner.
on the one hand, there was a lack of hygienic supply of water, and on the other, there was plenty of leakage in the drinking water.
so far wall street 's old guard seems to be winning the program-trading battle successfully mobilizing public and congressional opinion to bludgeon their tormentors.
failed to execute gpg.
install.
that can pay off down the road as customers especially the younger ones change from borrowers to savers/investors.
regular step.
each variation or change can occur only once the rules state.
odessa is a better game. really.
imported path.
prim's algorithm.
these three countries are n't completely off the hook though.
asia/yekaterinburg.
grab.
documents/vector graphics.
equal width.
line wrap.
cancel.
open file.
on.
an error occurred while deleting files from the archive.
forest: massive expansion of organizational structures in the forest sector was carried out in order to conserve the forest area and arrange the supply of forest products during the past period.
snow grains.
open terminal here.
the six wines of the domaine de la romanee-conti 72 of the most precious acres of vineyard anywhere in the world have commanded three-digit price tags for several years now.
use custom format.
participants will include the u.s. australia canada japan south korea and new zealand as well as the six members of the association of southeast asian nations thailand malaysia singapore indonesia the philippines and brunei.
ip address.
open a file selector to browse your files.
gradient.
detach the animation from the dialog window.
add private group.
extract archive.
delete area.
microwaves.
class name.
key file does not have key.
ford chairman donald e. petersen said yesterday that mr. veraldi has  helped to change the world 's perception of american-made cars.
kamloops.
memo information.
delay before drop down menus appear.
new window.
pamela sebastian in new york contributed to this article.
the agricultural development also deserves priority as this alone can increase the income of the common people and thereby expand internal maker for industrial sector.
for starters the executives joined mayor william h. hudnut iii for an evening of the indianapolis symphony orchestra and a guest pianist-comedian victor borge.
the package lists or status file could not be parsed or opened.
in fy 1989/90, nepal had a total of 2,231 post offices.
updates directory contains files with different length names both and.
mechanical.
there are no easter eggs in this program.
could not load  no initialization code in module.
left margin.
window list.
this gene called  gametocide  is carried into the plant by a virus that remains active for a few days.
obesity has many attendant risks and effects.
enable alphanumeric and punctuation keys? enter y or n.
malformed chunk in animation.
unlike the dwelling place and car, one takes his clothes wherever one goes.
invert in all layers.
logfile to log filter actions.
how to draw the toolbar.
print the title and artist of the playing song.
the company earlier this year adopted a shareholder-rights plan to ward off unwanted suitors.
updown arrow.
vertically aligned fuse.
there are many types of natural events that can spell disaster for us.
contrast.
columbia pictures entertainment inc. was dropped effective today from the recreational products and services industry group of the dow jones equity market index.
connection information.
prince george.
swedish.
add text layer.
i was very mischievous as a young boy.
superior.
release log messages.
good wages should permit radical improvements in living standards.
one of the interfaces that's required.
no such message in.
as the employees in public sectors consume, even at the existing low salary scales., a major share of the government revenue only a meager portion of it is available of capital investment.
section.
priorities in view of the limited financial, human and institutional resources of the country, it will not be possible to provide adequate resources to all activities within a single plan period.
play count.
visual gesture display.
drag to create a star. drag controls to edit the star shape. click to select.
fluid contacting vessel, simple.
the direction the arrow should point.
consumer confidence stayed strong in october despite the unsettling gyrations of the stock market.
many animals have very limited vision, simply because vision is relatively unimportant.
electrical.
in addition to these, some efforts have also been made in the construction of suspension bridge, wooden bridges, foot trail, mule track and service tra ck etc. which constrtute the minimum basic needs for the development of the rural areas.
dynamic grid resizing.
set the width.
townsville.
disconnected.
monitor tests.
join.
list members.
bitmap to use as a mask when drawing the text foreground.
therefore, while keeping education in agreement with moral norm and values, attention must be paid to developing the quality of education and making it joboriented.
urbanization is a process whereby people of urban area increases many fold as compared with people surrounding rural area.
the merc said that five-point limit will remain in effect for the first 10 minutes of trading.
there is no default action associated with this location.
not a regular file.
show zoomed out.
it has not been disruptive in the markets here  mr. maughan said.
packages being automatically installed to satisfy dependencies these packages are being installed because they are required by another package you have chosen for installation.
it was from sun itself that the ancient scientist secured heat through big mirrors.
congratulations, you have won!
sharjah.
file name.
merzifon.
the latin american nation has paid very little on its debt since early last year.
the gains also sparked buying interest in other real-estate companies traders said.
uses of water include agricultural, industrial, household, recreational and environmental activities.
william g. kuhns former chairman and chief executive officer of general public utilities corp. was elected a director of this maker of industrial and construction equipment increasing board membership to 10.
save window positions now.
jabber.
spoke ratio.
search for a string.
the folder name contains symbols that are not allowed in filenames.
battle creek.
inbox.
terms were n't disclosed.
derived.
there 's a price above which i 'm positive marshall has the courage not to pay  says a.d. correll georgia-pacific 's executive vice president for pulp and paper.
invalid unicode.
the differences in the shares of sectoral gross fixed investment in total development outlay are caused by the differences in the nature of the programmes proposed in various sectors.
durham.
bit rate.
select an object.
he said more than 90  of the funds were placed with japanese institutional investors.
firewall horizontal.
a department of health and human services rule adopted in 1988 prohibits the use of so-called title x funds for programs that assist a woman in obtaining an abortion such as abortion counseling and referrals.
procedure has been called with an invalid id for argumentmost likely a plugin is trying to work on a layer that doesn't exist any longer.
birthday.
keyboard shortcut to paste text.
go to the title menu.
there was significant progress in the fields of education and health.
enable/disable jagged edges removal antialiasing.
diamond creek 1985 lake vineyard cabernet weighed in this fall with a sticker price of $ 100 a bottle.
tab width.
palette for terminal applications.
click to sharpen.
the unpleasant sounds create discomfort and affect the nerves.
seats currently are quoted at $ 400,000 bid $ 425,000 asked.
ps of new hampshire manchester n.h. values its internal reorganization plan at about $ 2.2 billion.
dos/windows program.
components for electric circuits.
continuous gradient.
discount rate : 7.
user limit.
cyrillic/russian.
harlingen.
light 5.
development activities are the pathways for the economic development of people.
gambell.
the glass allows the sunlight through but traps the heat.
the share of the agricultural sector in gdp was 65.1 percent in 1964/65, which recorded a slight downward trend by reaching 61 percent in 1989/90.
port angeles.
chat windows.
in index arbitrage the widget is the s&p 500 and its price is constantly compared between the futures market in chicago and the stock markets largely in new york.
unknown error.
enter the new password minimum of maximum of characters please use a combination of upper and lower case letters and numbers.
automatically remember running applications when logging out.
balikesir.
existing window.
therefore, the reduction in the rate of population growth is one of the priority areas of this plan.
tampico.
error in gimp brush pipe file.
install a workstation.
fees 1 3/4.
new password again.
line style.
hyperlinked module name.
he predicted that the board would give the current duo until early next year before naming a new chief executive.
/buddies/add buddy.
wolf point.
confirm file selection if filename already exists.
please enable the account or send using another account.
public key information.
select by color tool select regions with similar colors.
telecommuter.
such development activities provide employment to people.
in the period between 1961/62 and 1989/90, some other small projects and big hydro-electric projects such as the panauti, trishuli, sunkosi, devighat, gandak, kulekhani and marsyangdi were commissioned.
has no version named.
will be upgraded.
record type.
as chairman of the house energy and commerce committee mr. dingell has almost single-handed control over clean-air legislation.
error renaming file.
manual operation.
show seahorse help.
maximized vertically.
similarly, the number of technical manpower was considerably increased during this period.
i 'm not saying advertising revenue is n't important  she says  but i could n't sleep at night  if the magazine bowed to a company because they once took out an ad.
select correct user.
the width of the calligraphic pen relative to the visible canvas area.
comoros.
zoom factor 1.
since the existing labour force is largely illiterate and unskilled, basic education and technical and vocational training opportunities will be expanded with particular emphasis on rural areas.
some of the functions whose initiation was attempted at conceptual and operational levels by the elected demarcation government in 1959 for fundamental changes in economic structure were given political colour and introduced as fundamental economic reform movements.
delete object.
debug.
invalid room number.
a gtkpacktype indicating whether the child is packed with reference to the start or end of the parent.
apply the style you last set on an object.
turnup arrow.
check for new messages in all folders.
icon for terminal window.
lancaster colony corp. said it acquired reames foods inc. in a cash transaction.
text layer.
or if they feel the wine is overpriced and they can get something equally good for less.
pixels below lines.
secret door detection.
but we can think of many reasons to stay out for the foreseeable future and well beyond.
apt line.
hide completed tasks after.
you don't have permission to create an archive in this folder.
invalid namespace at line column.
there is general feeling that present day crimes are all due to effects of cinema.
unknown error.
whether to wrap lines never, at word boundaries, or at character boundaries.
so the focus turned to other fixed-income markets corporate and mortgages in particular  she said.
plain text.
the magazine will reward with  page bonuses  advertisers who in 1990 meet or exceed their 1989 spending as long as they spent $ 325,000 in 1989 and $ 340,000 in 1990.
vitamins play a role in ensuring we maintain a balanced diet.
pinch amount.
click button to choose profile.
business process modeling notation.
the language this text is in, as an iso code. pango can use this as a hint when rendering the text. if you don't understand this parameter, you probably don't need it.
performs.
i believe in the system.
edenton.
sliač.
vala sample plugin.
if true, whenever there's new output the terminal will scroll to the bottom.
draw spelling error indicators on words as you type.
the development could have a dramatic effect on farm production especially cotton  said murray robinson president of delta & pine land co. a southwide inc. subsidiary that is one of the largest cotton seed producers in the u.s.
send queued items and retrieve new items.
fill the specified width and height with the tiling.
xerox corp. has told employees in its crum & forster personal insurance operations that it is laying off about 300 people or 25  of the staff.
one suit.
number of files.
rating.
but by the early 1980s its glory had faded like the yellow bricks of its broad facade.
size of the expander arrow.
unable to send item to calendar.
finland.
unexpected request.
usx has about $ 5.5 billion *u* in long-term debt and 257 million shares outstanding.
this form forces a lawyer to become in effect a witness against his client  said neal r. sonnett president of the national association of criminal defense lawyers.
the ancient man considered the sun as the source of heat and worshipped it as a god.
supernova.
preview size.
hover selection.
the refund pool  may not be held hostage through another round of appeals  judge curry said.
discount rate : 7.
search.
institutions mostly remained on the sidelines because of uncertainty regarding interest rates and the dollar.
the row number to attach the top of the child to.
add the selected folder to the bookmarks.
the sustained level of confidence can be attributed to the continued favorable circumstances which affect the consumer 's day-to-day economic life  said mr. linden.
the proposal comes as a surprise even to administration officials and temporarily throws into chaos the house 's work on clean-air legislation.
brussels, flemish and walloon brabant.
amount of red light in the color.
the owner could not be changed.
dictionary.
unable to open/create status database lockfile.
block ten.
keep orientation.
add connection points.
odyssey partners limited partnership an investment firm completed the purchase of may department stores co. 's caldor discount chain for $ 500 million plus the assumption of $ 52 million in debt.
rows.
reverse order.
des daughters and other victims of drugs would be better off if their cases were taken out of the courts.
as san francisco digs out from the pretty big one opponents say the last thing the city can afford is an expensive new stadium.
the contrast of the video.
sql code.
toggle the display of version numbers.
medicine transplant : growth of japanese trade and travel prompts beth israel medical center new york to set up a bilingual medical practice.
add sender to address book.
score.
brunei.
test-preparation booklets software and worksheets are a booming publishing subindustry.
all accounts have been removed.
explosives : the estimated demand for explosives during the eighth plan period is 1,400 metric tons.
minsk.
atlantic/sthelena.
the employment report which at times has caused wide swings in bond prices is due out tomorrow.
weatherly securities corp. new york and three of its principals dell eugene keehn and william northy prater jr. both of mercer island wash. and thomas albert mcfall of red bank n.j consented to a fine of $ 20,000.
your password will be transmitted unencrypted.
junk bonds trailed the group again.
unminimize.
bright orange.
by author.
perform a quick set of selfcheck tests.
program trading has taken off in japan since last year 's introduction of home-market stock-index futures trading on the tokyo and osaka stock exchanges.
payments are expected to range between $ 9 billion and $ 12 billion this year.
common wisdom suggests a single-digit rate of growth reflecting a weakening in the economy and corporate profits.
each right entitles the shareholder to buy $ 100 face amount of 13.5  bonds due 1993 and warrants to buy 23.5 common shares at 30 cents a share.
sepang.
move.
cannot create preview.
defense secret.
create the specified number of rows and columns.
show key type options.
destroy with parent.
in terms of volume it was an inauspicious beginning for november.
overwrite mode.
enable verbose output.
change workspace.
translated by.
conflicts with.
the growth rate in the past years in internal resources as a financing source for development expenditure stood at 16.4 percent at current prices and 6.1 percent at constant prices.
show position.
sun.
radio button.
supported modules.
limit line width.
supplemental punctuation.
but they have n't clarified what those might be.
thus, by the end of f.y. 1991/92, one post office served 8146 people in an area of 65 sq. kms. b.
typically money-fund yields beat comparable short-term investments because portfolio managers can vary maturities and go after the highest rates.
arrange items.
allows for controlling the values associated with different buddy states.
/buddies/join a chat.
if true, the value of the customcommand setting will be used in place of running a shell.
small-lot buying targeted at incentive-backed issues pushed up the nikkei.
the government too must play its part.
icon widget.
intersection.
any form of religious extremism should be resisted and those caught inciting religious hatred put behind bars.
list index is out of bounds.
if true, remote users accessing the desktop are required to support encryption. it is highly recommended that you use a client which supports encryption unless the intervening network is trusted.
description contains.
the recent cash squeeze at campeau corp. first boston 's most lucrative client of the decade is proving costly to first boston because it arranged more than $ 3 billion of high-yield high-risk junk financings for campeau units.
blytheville.
save keyboard shortcuts on exit.
budgetary deficit affects imports as well as balance of payments, which is a peculiar characteristic of a small economy like our.
font size.
timeout reached.
in addition to this, it is estimated that 70 percent of the diseases are caused by the polluted water.
-lrb- mr. reich 's new  different trains  for string quartet uses the technique magisterially.
he said disciplinary proceedings are confidential and declined to comment on whether any are being held against mr. trudeau.
the market available to nepalese exporters in limited.
hunan.
patients who receive canine or feline visitors are found to have lower blood pressure and improved appetite and be more receptive to therapy says mary ann o'loughlin program coordinator.
they were a self-perpetuating club that treated the tower as sort of a separate premises  the vicar hummerstone says.
directory that will be searched for icons.
paste objects from clipboard to mouse point, or paste text.
ciudad bolívar.
no match.
due date is wrong.
program trading is here to stay and computers are here to stay and we just need to understand it.
local files only.
attach.
topleft.
but  because it 's all we 've got i 'm going to vote for it.
gafsa.
could not find a theme! be sure exists and contains the usual themes.
failed to close file.
it also would junk an innovative market-based system for trading emissions credits among polluters.
all information in this memo will be deleted and can not be restored.
torturetest an application by setting and unsetting a bunch of values of different types for keys on the command line.
frame geometry does not specify dimension for border.
columns.
select paths to inset/outset.
they are n't accepted everywhere however.
they argue that u.s. investors often can buy american depositary receipts on the big stocks in many funds ; these so-called adrs represent shares of foreign companies traded in the u.s.
draw bezier curves and straight lines.
failed to scan themes directory.
that explains why the number of these wines is expanding so rapidly.
warning failed to parse int value '.
bytes.
however, the main disadvantage is that industrialization sets up living standard expectations which depend absolutely on a healthy overseas trade.
sabadell.
although georgia gulf has n't been eager to negotiate with mr. simmons and nl a specialty chemicals concern the group apparently believes the company 's management is interested in some kind of transaction.
the u.s. is one of the few industrialized nations that does n't have a higher standard of regulation for the smooth needle-like fibers such as crocidolite that *t*-1 are classified as amphobiles according to brooke t. mossman a professor of pathlogy at the university of vermont college of medicine.
unknown attribute in element.
select paths to break apart.
japanese investors nearly single-handedly bought up two new mortgage securities-based mutual funds totaling $ 701 million the u.s. federal national mortgage association said.
username.
never blow in a dog's ear.
the model for the tree view.
bright blue.
emphasis was given to the collection of data on economic conditions organizational reform and improvement, and the development of the economic infrastructure.
diagram tree.
process view sort order.
annaba.
revert.
edge detection with control of edge thickness.
node tool preferences.
cannot attach cms enveloped data.
projects costing less per hectare and projects requiring minimum government involvement in repair and maintenance.
definition.
no efforts have yet been made to rehabilitate the consumed area with trees.
stock id.
during the panchayat regime, programmes were implemented with greater emphasis on the task of preserving the system than on national development.
zoom out.
sanya.
selects a random size for each stroke.
index-arbitrage trading is  something we want to watch closely  an official at london 's stock exchange said.
ponca city.
constant factor greater 1.
commonwealth edison said the ruling could force it to slash its 1989 earnings by $ 1.55 a share.
total investment requirement for the plan period and sectoral allocation of resources as mentioned above, the size of total investment and its sectoral allocation patterns, growth in productivity, the control in government expenditure and the policies encouraging the diversion of private sector savings to productive sectors will contribute to the attainment of a 5.1 percent economic growth rate.
import.
update package information.
oroville.
conflict.
ungroup selected groups.
europe/ljubljana.
skipping unpack of already unpacked source in.
another user is viewing your desktop.
failed to read from file.
send / receive.
delete toolbar.
options.
whether the widget is the default widget.
today is not the time to signal that congress in any way sanctions the dismal state into which antitrust enforcement has fallen  mr. edwards argued.
click to erase the line.
location.
the efforts of this period were insufficient even to maintain past levels of average per capita agricultural production.
however paul johanson monsanto's director of plant sciences said the company's chemical spray overcomes these problems and is  gentle on the female organ.
satu mare.
false displays the "invisible char" instead of the actual text password mode.
base card ace.
new seed.
that amount is convertible into shares of meridian common stock at $ 2 a share during its one-year term.
you have reached your limit for the number of contacts allowed.
copy the selected text to the clipboard.
active appointments.
prime rate : 10 1/2.
automatic proxy configuration url.
notify when.
can change accelerators.
object to path.
maximize window.
arrange files.
choose the type of importer to run.
'set' output variable.
table options.
you must choose one to install.
while the average stay of a tourist was 13.1 days in 1974/75, this went down to 12 days in 1989/90.
copper : futures prices partially recovered monday 's declines because chilean miners voted to strike.
palettes.
hold.
propagate certain colors to neighboring pixels.
does not contain.
range low.
if hawkers have fewer customers, they are sure to think twice when they want to increase the price of food.
campinas.
automatically gray vertical flows.
line right.
remove text from frame creates a singleline text object.
in addition to that, they have to undergo very painful medical procedures.
resources are the main requisite for the development of the nation.
you may not export keys with this cipher.
farnborough.
important.
quarter circle.
revoke signature.
clone tool selectively copy from an image or pattern, using a brush.
keep even fields.
unsupported or invalid image width.
file to write resolver state to.
it also estimated that losses from the oct. 17 earthquake in california would be no more than $ 6 million and would be included in fourth-quarter results.
view.
key file does not start with a group.
reload.
iceland.
spiral.
dushanbe.
evergreen.
smart media.
okay, okay, if i give you an easter egg, will you go away?
type, module or object keyword.
go to page.
unable to stat the mount point.
the following packages will be upgraded.
while executing the small irrigation projects, the concerned agency will have to explain clearly about cash voluntary labour and repair and maintenance expenses to be borne by the users ' committee, and should execute the project after getting written agreement from them on these provisions, construction expenses of the project will be operated by joint signature of the person nominated by the usersâ€™ committee and the technical representative of the executing agency.
livingston.
totem website.
less than or equal to.
the main reason behind the higher growth in industrial production that year can be attributed to the convenient supply of industrial raw materials following the end of the trade and transit impasse between nepal and india in may 1990.
quatorze.
stock-index options options give holders the right but not the obligation to buy a call or sell a put a specified amount of an underlying investment by a certin date at a preset price known as the strike price.
donets'k.
it can also be used for lighting the household.
europe/zaporozhye.
comments about the program.
the preferred stock which would have a dividend rate of $ 1.76 a year would be convertible into heritage common at a rate of four common shares for each preferred.
background image scrolls.
login time exceeded.
mr. bernstein a tall energetic man who is widely respected as a publishing executive has spent much of his time in recent years on human rights issues.
cannot decrypt message incorrect message format.
cortez.
required.
in addition to these, some efforts have also been made in the construction of suspension bridge, wooden bridges, foot trail, mule track and service tra ck etc. which constrtute the minimum basic needs for the development of the rural areas.
use "i'm not sure" flags.
dynamic row header set for column.
open folder.
artist/artist  album.
break selected paths into subpaths.
load at startup.
the ussr has been in dispute with turkey over this matter as has egypt with the sudan.
the loss of sight tends to train a more acute hearing.
single click to open items.
kelowna.
the earnings drop appears particularly steep in comparison with last year 's unusually strong third quarter when the company was riding an industrywide boom in demand and pricing.
last played.
in addition they will receive stock in the reorganized company which will be named ranger industries inc.
i was cycling as fast as i could to get home before the downpour.
load image map.
if you do not send a cancelation notice, the other participants may not know the task has been deleted.
the height of the main window.
the proposed rules also would be tougher on the insiders still required to file reports he said.
1.3  irrigation : while the irrigation facility was available to additional 20,810 hectares only in 1990/91, it is estimated to have been extended to an additional area of 27,527 hectares.
test options.
encapsulated postscript using postscript latin1 fonts.
for connecting to and downloading mail from pop servers.
message filters.
while, on the on hand, the government will definitely have to make some harsh decisions, the development perspectives, on the other hand, will need to be compatible with the prevailing national situation and the economic changes in the international scenario.
file is not a fractalexplorer file.
slidell.
moultrie.
ashamed.
pascal.
camiri.
the controversy began in 1987 when the national institutes of health aware of the policy implications of its research asked for an hhs review of its plan to implant fetal tissue into the brain of a patient suffering from parkinson 's disease.
tampa.
last revision.
remove buddy.
but these projects have not enable to provide irrigation facilities to the farmers on time.
however, both internal and external factors were responsible for this high price rise.
liepāja.
sure enough when he arrived at the embassy two days later the machine-gun-toting guards were gone for the first time in five months.
la romana.
industrial production showed and average increase of 7 percent per annum from the analysis of the production index of 18 principal industrial products from the period 1974/75 to 1989/90.
done.
subtitles.
in addition a big loan that first boston made to ohio mattress cowas n't repaid on time when its $ 450 million junk financing for a buy-out of the bedding company was withdrawn.
millington.
can't add notifications to a local configuration source.
taiwan.
unknown spline subtype.
play queue.
copper harbor.
eugene.
santa catarina.
go to last page.
when enabled, gimp will try to use the display color profile from the windowing system. the configured monitor profile is then only used as a fallback.
farmers' field channels will continue to be improved with the users' participation by arranging necessary technical assistance.
use the command line.
north korea.
alternative button order.
it is the exchange of information to create a better understanding between them.
reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more.
table.
new document.
government financial situation 3.1 development expenditure the total development expenditure stood at rs. 15,979.5 million at current prices in the fiscal year 1990/91.
ideas improve and extend as they are exchanged.
there is $ 30.9 million of fourth series bonds the interest on which is not subject to the federal alternative minimum tax.
carnival had expected that ship to be delivered next fall.
changes.
seconds arrow color.
some analysts are worried that reports of the grain industry 's problems might spark investors to begin buying corn futures contracts only to see little appreciation.
color picker.
offline.
designed domain.
not found in gflareslist.
is not a valid value for state attribute.
populationtelephone ratio in nepal reached 2501 with the availability of the service of 71,560 telephone lines in fy 1989/90.
phillip riese an american express executive vice president says the promotion with buick is his company 's first with an auto maker but  hopefully -lcb- will be -rcb- the first of many  in the company 's effort to promote its green card as  the total car-care card.
upgrade.
hide and show menubar.
unreadable.
1. pick from the drawing.
packages depending on.
structural dynamics research corp. which makes computer-aided engineering software said it introduced new technology in mechanical design automation that will improve mechanical engineering productivity.
show border.
in part prices reflect development of a market structure based on such variables as the number of prints.
all documents except untitled ones.
fraction.
virtual.
the programmes receiving priority in this plan are: (a) agricultural intensification and diversification: it is being increasingly realized that the contribution of agriculture to the overall economic development of the nation is not only determined by the growth rate of agriculture but also by its pattern.
some erosion is natural and inevitable.
whether a spin button should wrap upon reaching its limits.
color is computed from the average of all pixels under the brush.
chimoio.
recommends.
workspace number.
an instant messaging client for gnome.
per column.
imports of the types of watches that now will be eligible for duty-free treatment totaled about $ 37.3 million in 1988 a relatively small share of the $ 1.5 billion in u.s. watch imports that year according to an aide to u.s. trade representative carla hills.
no such channel.
in order to fully translate such development process into practice, the government will adopt the policy of decentralization.
it affects the development works.
option takes a value.
c shell script.
salvador.
development of rural infrastructure in order to support industrial growth, the market for industrial production will be expanded in rural areas by providing roads and other forms of transportation linking rural communities and market centres.
background color set.
show attachment bar.
however, there have been accusations that asian schools are not churning out well-rounded individuals.
note some changes will not take effect until restart.
enable webkit developer tools.
wheaton.
war is the deadly enemy of the human race and civilisation.
activity blocks.
it was like someone had turned a knife in me.
specify a short halfline description to go in a schema.
pdf document.
at plant genetic systems researchers have isolated a pollen-inhibiting gene that can be inserted in a plant to confer male sterility.
adjust the preview's brightness.
campbell said mr. mcgovern had withdrawn his name as a candidate for re-election as a director at the annual shareholder meeting scheduled for nov. 17.
saint vincent and the grenadines.
cannot get channel information.
this democracy is suddenly a little more democratic.
action/trigger.
set initial value.
region.
revert failed. no file name associated with this image.
oklahoma city.
limoges.
normal.
unknown action to be performed.
in part this may reflect the fact that  she speaks a more progressive language ' than her husband as columbia 's profethel klein puts it.
message from.
jackson domain.
but the administration 's handling of the fetal-tissue transplant issue disturbs many scientists.
yet he is n't in favor of new legislation.
netscape.
paste.
corrects lens distortion.
how much to "darken" the edges of each brush stroke.
this is a sample message in a sample dialog.
openoffice.org drawing template.
foreign assistance: due to limited internal revenue mobilistation, there was a growing reliance on foreign assistance for development expenditure.
examinations - this is a word that causes sleepless nights, a word can change a cheerful person into a nervous wreck.
displace pixels in a ripple pattern.
source : telerate systems inc.
select this.
in a competitive market this investor has many ways to execute his transactions and he will have more alternatives both foreign and domestic if his volume is profitable 0 for an exchange to handle.
play a sound for outgoing messages.
annually increasing government' liability in small and medium projects (up to 2,000 ha) due to the delay in executing the policy of handing over such projects to the user committees.
invisible character.
no next song.
foreground color.
other, not assigned.
in a surprise move the british government cleared the way for a bidding war for jaguar plc by agreeing to remove an obstacle to a takeover of the auto maker.
font variant as a pangovariant, e.g. pangovariantsmallcaps.
you don't have the right permissions.
table 1 gives the financial allocations and actual expenditures during the second plan.
cannot get user information.
similarly, programmes with higher comparative advantages will be implemented in agriculture, industry, tourism and other sectors.
they mature 1992-1999 2009 and 2017.
content service switch 1100.
afterwards, family planning and maternity child health projects were implemented in all the 75 districts.
stop loading the current location.
total globbed strings.
nodes.
ask for confirmation before closing an image without saving.
the time currently selected.
installing/removing packages requires administrative privileges, which you currently do not have. would you like to change to the root account?
enumerated list.
whether to select the contents of an entry when it is focused.
accessible table row header.
ethiopia.
sensitivity for yellow/blue component.
full name.
liberty national bancorp said its acquisition of florence deposit bank florence ky. first announced in april has been completed in a transaction valued at $ 13.1 million.
left margin.
really quit aptitude?
tourniquets are not recommended unless in the direst emergency.
sounds when conversation has focus.
charlottesville.
remove.
macintosh stuffit archive.
text width.
strikethrough set.
effects.
move the selected folder into another folder.
the procedure to process batch commands with.
many people including the big board think that it 's too late to put the genie back in the bottle.
cannot save indexed image with transparency in bmp file format.
this response is not from a current attendee. add the sender as an attendee?
needles.
top of window.
in new brunswick n.j. a johnson & johnson spokesman declined comment.
memory dump.
example content for ubuntu.
allow.
although agriculture sector contributes the most to gross national production, the development in irrigation has been less than expected.
light 6.
family name.
account confirmation requested.
keyboard shortcut to open a new tab.
selection in context.
moniker has an unknown moniker prefix.
punta gorda.
element is not allowed inside a element.
the four of hearts.
failed to allocate diversion.
therefore, the greatest challenge now is to devise ways and means of discouraging these trends and steering the economy in the direction of more productive and sustainable economic development through appropriate policy reforms.
snap to.
that was partially offset by the resumption of space shuttle flights and increased demand for expendable launch-vehicle engines.
select folder for temporary files.
classification.
expects the first argument to be either "any", "summary", or "description", or "location", or "attendee", or "organizer", or "classification".
piedras negras.
some efforts of export promotion and the creation of some institutional bases over the past years helped achieve some success in countrywise diversification of export trade.
could not get a selection to delete.
the quality of staff is also different, as many people want to teach in cities.
downloaded.
inefficient public enterprises : the performance of state owned enterprises reached a stage of great inefficiency, indifference and apathy.
a description for the audio profile.
find possible search bases.
education:  the country made some progress in the field of education in the past.
tab size.
refresh devices.
and most country funds were clobbered more than most stocks after the 1987 crash.
list view.
drag to continue the path from this point.
file too big.
several package info entries found, only one allowed.
for example the herald consistently beat its much-larger rival on disclosures about los angeles mayor tom bradley 's financial dealings.
this plan has made arrangements of adequate resources of further productive involvement of the existing human resources in the efforts of national development.
no more solutions available.
bottom attachment.
button mouse.
reset code.
its backers fielded every important interest on their team a popular mayor the chamber of commerce the major media and spent $ 100,000 on promotion.
as a result, investment could not be channeled to productive sectors.
deal another round.
error need valid input file.
move guide.
number. artist  title.
the diversification in agriculture will also assist in maintaining the ecological balance.
the name of the selected font.
because of the fact that most of the small irrigation systems are operate by farmers, it seems desirable to pay special attention to such projects as can be managed and operated by themselves.
there are certain cult wines that can command these higher prices  says larry shapiro of marty 's one of the largest wine shops in dallas.
raise node.
out of ten places seven of them lies within the kathmandu valley and the rest lies outside.
temple added that sea containers is still mired in legal problems in bermuda where the supreme court has temporarily barred sea containers from buying back its own stock in a case brought by stena and tiphook.
sony corp. completed its tender offer for columbia pictures entertainment inc. with columbia shareholders tendering 99.3  of all common shares outstanding by the tuesday deadline.
alamogordo.
there is one similar message.
there occurred an excessive flow of foreign loans to bring down balance of payment deficit to a favourable situation in the years past.
pacific/honolulu.
aghajari.
an analysis conducted on the basis of the current extent of available foreign aid indicates that extensive improvements in work performance and considerable increase in domestic savings must be achieved in order to further increase the economic growth rate.
file size.
group items by.
finger command to run.
split gradient segments uniformly.
center.
tiny.
'if' normally open ladder contact.
games.
a.l. williams corp. was merged into primerica corp. new york after a special meeting of williams shareholders cleared the transaction the companies said.
changes.
find now.
thus, the share of industrial goods slightly declined from 69.1 percent in f.y. 1990/91 to 63.4 percent on f.y. 1991/92.
pnm image.
type hint.
there was blood all over them.
water level.
the figure increased to 2271 post offices by the end of f.y. 1991/92.
small brush.
in point of fact volatility as measured by the annualized standard deviation of daily stock price movements has frequently been much higher than it is today.
amount.
elisa hollis launched a diaper service last year because state college pa. where she lives did n't have one.
clearing the undo history of this image will gain of memory.
no description available.
adjust the number of spikes.
show warning dialog when killing processes.
from the table, it clearly appears that ins spite of high priority accorded to private sector investment, the private sector's savings in likely to exceed its investment amount.
while it called for liberal economic policies and the creation of an atmosphere conducive to industrialists with some reassurances in certain spheres for achieving industrial expansion, the industries could not prosper in the absence of transparency in industrial policy which remained under strict government control.
lens flare.
ingersoll-rand co.
collection of data is the first step among the statistical methods.
misspelled word.
view.
enable action keys? enter y or n.
initial zoom ratio.
draw border.
flatten image.
sectors.
curves does not operate on indexed layers.
grenchen.
but company officials said yesterday that they decided to take a $ 43 million pretax charge for the period to cover a restructuring of world-wide manufacturing operations citing extended weakness in the market as well as a decision to switch to more economical production techniques.
preferences.
excluding these orders backlogs declined 0.3.
whether to show the preview pane.
minimum possible value for x.
old persian.
under this arrangement, the banks conducting business in foreign currency were allowed to sell 65 percent of their earnings from trade or services at the open market exchange rate by making available 35 percent of the foreign currency earning to nepal rastra bank at a rate fixed by the bank.
no academic changes evolved in the attitudinal perspective of the students an teachers, unsustainable financial burden increased on the educational sector and public participation was almost obliterated.
month view.
delegate meeting.
in the seventh plan the amount of total investment stood at rs. 103, 014 million at 1991/92 prices.
cartoon.
selective gaussian blur.
enter the address of the file you would like to open.
sample merged.
gtktalog catalogue.
sales in the latest period were $ 1.76 billion a 13  increase from last year 's $ 1.55 billion.
switch to layer below.
factories booked $ 236.74 billion in orders in september nearly the same as the $ 236.79 billion in august the commerce department said.
run the command in a terminal.
all ca certificate files.
measure the rulers and enter their lengths.
pacific/wake.
meanwhile treasury bonds ended modestly higher in quiet trading.
bailey controls based in wickliffe ohio makes computerized industrial controls systems.
blythe.
failed to create the player.
host not found.
at&t fax : american telephone & telegraph 's general business systems division new york awarded the ad account for its fax product line to ogilvy & mather new york a wpp group agency.
mexico which is normally a sugar exporter has had production problems in the past two years analysts said.
document viewer.
her story is partly one of personal downfall.
blue frequency.
phase angle, range 0360.
cannot open mh directory path.
but the most experienced pollution through speed is in the air media.
the top money funds are currently yielding well over 9.
unnamed buffer.
air detection.
change the workspace layout of the screen to use number rows.
network cloud.
wireless interface.
revert selected snippet.
distributed director.
failed to construct test pipeline for.
conference does not exist.
the main factors for the increase in money supply was due to the increase in foreign assets by 14 percent and in internal borrowings by 26.1 percent.
america/stvincent.
how many government programs and policies exist because they line the pockets of political insiders ?
cell size.
yet, compared to historical growth rate 1974/751989/90, it is on the decline.
invalid root directory.
koito has refused to grant mr. pickens seats on its board asserting he is a greenmailer trying to pressure koito 's other shareholders into buying him out at a profit.
dunkin' is based in randolph mass.
islip.
brightnesscontrast does not operate on indexed layers.
serbian.
network address.
nothing selected.
indian/christmas.
unsustainability of the projects due to the lack of necessary attention towards the institutional aspects during the execution of the programme by the government agency.
unable to remove from privacy list.
transfer.
save all.
victoria beach.
great northern nekoosa which surged 20 1/8 tuesday after georgia-pacific launched a $ 3.18 billion offer for the company dropped 1 3/8 to 61 1/2 in big board composite trading of 5.1 million shares.
ief image.
also excluded will be investments in companies with  significant  business stemming from weapons manufacture alcoholic beverages or tobacco.
enable popup.
new caledonia.
click this button to show a calendar.
encoding.
the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral.
previous script.
researchers at american telephone & telegraph co. 's bell laboratories reported they raised the electrical current-carrying capacity of new superconductor crystals by a factor of 100 moving the materials closer to commercial use.
degrees.
short of a total ban some anti-programmers have proposed several middle-ground reforms which they say would take away certain advantages program traders currently enjoy in the marketplace that other investors do n't.
error copying mail temp file.
right attach.
burmese.
other type.
asia/phnompenh.
this room is not capable of being configured.
dimensions.
accessible table caption.
failed to open file  open failed.
sigmoid characteristic.
the rule also prohibits funding for activities that  encourage promote or advocate abortion.
confirm device removal request.
subcontractors / suppliers / manufacturers.
unable to affiliate user as.
thumb and pouch.
above current.
searching by copyright.
you have been killed by.
the saturation of the video.
small investors are absolutely dismayed that wall street is stacking the deck against them and these wide swings are scaring them to death  says raymond a. mason chairman of regional broker legg mason inc. in baltimore.
viewport.
there can only be one active keyboard controller. you already have a keyboard controller in your list of active controllers.
open group.
therefore, in order to achieve some concrete growth in agricultural production and productivity, it is essential to make optimum utilization of the irrigation facilities through their suithable renovation, maintenance and operation, and to establish convenient and reliable systems for the distribution of improved seeds and chemical fertilizers, the dissemination of appropriate technology and th e disbursement of agricultural loans.
exposure.
teachers may rush through the syllabus leaving weaker students in the lurch.
â similarly, at the secondary school level, the number of schools increased from 156 in 1961 to 1959 in april 1990, the number of teachers from 1,772 to 10,421 and the number of students from 26,845 to 264,525.
text to copy.
window management.
if not set, each column has the width of the widest object in it.
macroeconomic impact of total and sectoral investment the reallocation in sectoral investment and economy in resource utilization, accompanied by liberal economic policies, will not only help achieve higher growth rates but also increase employment opportunities and maintain economic stability during the plan period.
was removed from the file system.
text ended before matching quote was found forthe text was.
retired developers.
maximum time allowed between two clicks for them to be considered a double click in milliseconds.
by sender.
toutdoux document.
bonobo component browser.
a tooltip for this action.
please insert the disc labeled into the drive.
image doesn't contain any layers.
preview.
tool bar.
extract archives asking the destination folder and quit the program.
upjohn further estimated that about 50  of the employees who leave for early retirement may be replaced.
the los angeles county district attorney 's office filed seven felony and five misdemeanor counts charging that late last year and early this year the irvine calif.-based circuit-board manufacturer illegally disposed of acid caustic and heavy metals into the sewer system and stored hazardous materials in leaky unlabeled or open-top containers.
at the time the second plan was prepared, knowledge of economic conditions in nepal was still extremely limited.
trying to overwrite a diversion,  and /.
kannada.
kharoshthi.
when their changes are completed *t*-1 and after they have worked up a sweat ringers often skip off to the local pub leaving worship for others below.
f.h. faulding & co. an australian pharmaceuticals company said its moleculon inc. affiliate acquired kalipharma inc. for $ 23 million.
the lifestyle of people in developed countries has reached its state gradually.
unable to resolve dependencies.
horizontally aligned inductor.
rerequest authorization.
the contribution of taxes to gdp stood at 2.3 percent at constant prices from indirect taxes and 0.8 percent from direct taxes in 1972/73, which rose to 4.0 percent and 0.9 percent respectively in 1989/90.
polish.
he also asserted that exact questions were n't replicated.
riverside.
it can also be misused if it is handled by inexpert hands.
further liberalization, simplification and clarification of government policies, and.
one of the objects is not a path, cannot perform boolean operation.
asia/istanbul.
east milton.
number of channels.
challenges: as a result of the controlled and protection-oriented policies of the past, the economy could not achieve desired level of development and economic distortions emerged.
pick a color.
random hue.
view message of the day.
zagreb.
groups.
besides, there was tremendous pressure on price following an increased money supply at an average if 21 percent per annum because of the big increase in government expenditure during the seventh plan 1989 90 period.
entity/relationship diagram objects.
haddock.
the u.s. government in recent years has accused japanese companies of excessively slashing prices on semiconductors and supercomputers products fujitsu and nec make.
information/financial.
sybase client application.
the campaign has blamed these reporting problems on computer errors.
private key file.
conflicting options are present a window should be interacted with, but has been used.
undock the toolbar.
openoffice.org writer document.
is now known as.
midtones.
save lighting preset.
spiral number of turns.
using email address.
must be run as root.
in order to enjoy reading, one must cultivate that habit.
while it breaks down in prolonged sunlight it is n't recyclable.
mr. harper a veteran of several manufacturing companies who joined campbell in 1986 will take charge of all overseas operations as well as pepperidge.
unique identifier for the file entry. this will be used to save the history list.
conduction.
screenshot.
transformations.
the present position of the several sectors of the economy is given in the following sections: agriculture nepal’s agricultural output depends very heavily on climatic conditions.
return cards to stock.
default graph outgoing network traffic color.
exiting.
asia/gaza.
secondary backward stepper.
search again for the same string.
percentage.
tasks are groups of packages which provide an easy way to select a predefined set of packages for a particular purpose.
khmer symbols.
gradient scale.
mexicali.
some have been training for months ; others only recently left active status.
flame.
msn screen name list.
$ 10 billion of 30-year bonds to be auctioned thursday and to mature aug. 15 2019.
mr. rapanelli met in august with u.s. assistant treasury secretary david mulford.
ahmadabad.
in order to use this feature of the program, must be installed in your system.
pacific/saipan.
rotated.
all image files.
microsoft wmv playlist.
cursor position.
agriculture is that sector which will be able to involve, although only for a short or medium period, the rapidly increasing labour force in productive activities.
the targa image format.
unable to open to log actions.
filled box.
the chinese in turn took aim at american  interference  in china 's domestic affairs.
in october 30.6  said they will buy appliances in the coming six months compared with 27.4  in september and 26.5  in october 1988.
the url does not appear to be a podcast feed. it may be the wrong url, or the feed may be broken. would you like rhythmbox to attempt to use it anyway?
inhibit.
device status.
data formatting.
macro subprogram call step.
if you select a package, an explanation of its current state will appear in this space.
reposition icons to better fit in the window and avoid overlapping.
chanute.
name contains.
deprecated function. user modifications to the mime database are no longer supported.
as it was incumbent upon the interim gov ernment to fulfil these two functions within a short period on a priority basis, the task of formulating a periodic plan was postponed for the time being.
sort on saturation.
color management.
create a new document.
webcams.
programming.
america/shiprock.
undo last zoom change.
mr. pratt remarked that he thinks steeper prices have come about because producers do n't like to see a hit wine dramatically increase in price later on.
cellspacing.
gzipcompressed file.
scores.
at the charles schwab & co. office in atlanta 's buckhead district a group of investors voices skepticism that federal officials would curb program trading.
key name.
accelerator to move the current tab to the left.
scanning disc for index files.
failed to get hostname.
alarm center.
set image print resolution.
remove the sevens.
linear, removing entries once played.
show the 'input methods' menu.
buffer.
blanked box.
procedure has been called with a wrong value type for argumentexpected got.
legislation to lift the debt ceiling is ensnarled in the fight over cutting capital-gains taxes.
space to put between the label and the child.
subprogram.
this being britain no woman has filed an equal-opportunity suit but the extent of the problem surfaced this summer in a series of letters to  the ringing world  a weekly newspaper for ringers.
display mode.
whether the proxies for this action look like radio action proxies.
configuration prefix where gnome was installed.
maastricht.
superconductors conduct electricity without resistance when cooled.
new zealand's finance minister david caygill lashed out at such suggestions.
lock channels for together.
but asian nations ' harsh memories of their military domination by japan in the early part of this century make them fearful of falling under japanese economic hegemony now.
current.
finnish.
visibility.
directory operation on key.
unpacking.
save anyway.
select range to adjust.
documentation browser.
dashes.
the model for the treemodelsort to sort.
no more userdefinable colors  using black.
during the past two years also, the foreign trade deficit has increased and is the previous years.
the display format for the header line.
key is no longer used.
open in fullscreen mode.
reinstallation of is not possible, it cannot be downloaded.
remove all keyboard shortcuts.
shadow blur.
general.
rename.
whether or not to play event sounds.
the largest brush to create.
modify.
dashain is the longest and the most important festival of nepal.
assign task.
the new wall street of computers and automated trading threatens to make dinosaurs of the 49 big board stock-specialist firms.
must specify alternating keys/values as arguments.
downloading of image data.
america/stthomas.
previous document.
add to the list of active controllers.
cylinder.
tile image into smaller versions of the original.
notification service.
move up.
packages encourage loyalty by rewarding customers for doing the bulk of their banking in one place.
change the color saturation by this percentage for each row.
scanner.
rocksprings.
the lack of physical activity means fewer calories are being burned, leading to weight gain and obesity.
handheld.
geometry has not been defined.
the many conveniences which are available such as elevators, cars and the internet reduce the level of physical activity.
games and amusements.
the company said the restructuring is n't expected to have any impact adverse or otherwise on its financial results.
meßstetten.
transmission errors.
electronic medium.
guangzhou.
idaho falls.
size of the cursor referenced by cursortheme.
this is not conducive to good health.
move the pattern fill inside the object.
open your personal folder.
zoom all.
about 71% of the earth surface is covered with water.
about gnome.
empty.
radial gradient.
fractalexplorer gradient.
while looking at the roadpopulation ratio, every kilometer of road had served a population averaging 7,780 people in 1960, upon the reduction of this ration on 1989/90, every kilometer served a population of 2441.
repeat.
the total gross investment outlay for the eighth plan period is estimated to be rs. 170,332 million table2.
following the introduction of the new policy in 1992, approval has been granted by mid june to a remarkable number of industries seeking registration.
enter a name for the new gflare.
pick a layer or guide.
unused.
pixel value scaling.
while the gross investment comprised foreign assistance to the extent of 4.5 percent of the gdp in 1074/75, this reliance was estimated to have gradually risen and reached 12 percent in 1989/90.
configuring.
this message is encrypted. it would be difficult for an outsider to view the content of this message.
the percentage of black to pull out of the colored inks.
properties.
striking.
no efforts were made that year for the formulation and implementation of plan.
warroad.
drag anchors.
if women are educated, the future generation is also educated.
sometimes you just go with your gut.
nepal's vast potential to generate comparatively cheap hydropower provides comparative advantages in many energy through modern technology and its integration with the development of other sectors of the economy can enhance sectoral productivity as well as comparative advantages.
normally open contact vertical.
because of the dynamic nature of the asian standard, the term was eventually deleted from the slogan.
content size.
no consideration is more important than the health and safety of our employees.
use reverse value.
test.
in the first nine months net was $ 306 million compared with a loss of $ 195 million in the 1988 period.
you are delegating a recurring event. what would you like to delegate?
the training wage covers only workers who are 16 to 19 years old.
they continually advise their clients on which individual stocks to buy or sell while their clients continue to hope for superior performance.
no longer requiring the removal of.
save active fractal to file.
meanwhile specialists ' trading risks have skyrocketed as a result of stock-market volatility.
agriculture is even today primarily dependent on weather condition.
server does not use any supported authentication method.
/drive.
install a minimal virtual machine.
map type.
moves flat review to the end of the line.
line background color.
the problem is that many countries are geared to fossil rather than nuclear power sources.
invalid base directory.
sierpinski.
but other people do n't want to lose the bridges ' beautiful sometimes historic features.
remove anyway.
objects to pattern.
kindersley.
winning a bonus for a third year was n't that important to her mrs. yeargin insists.
benchmark.
directinput events.
while village level bodies will be accountable to the district level bodies, they in turn, will be accountable to the centre.
some takeover experts were skeptical saying it was possible that mr. steinberg made the filing only to help boost the value of any remaining reliance stake in ual.
arj archive.
failure remote does not trust/support your public key.
no selections matched.
if he does not he will help realize madison 's fear in the federalist no. 48 of a legislature  everywhere extending the sphere of its activity and drawing all powers into its impetuous vortex.
freezing rain.
workstation monitor.
nakusp.
opening thumbnail for.
first union he says now has packages for seven customer groups.
pacific/nauru.
add a photo to this key.
video chat.
mr. leemans said the hybrid rapeseeds created with this genetic engineering yield 15  to 30  more output than the commercial strains used currently.
couldn't parse layout no height specified.
maximum mouse drag in screen pixels which is considered a click, not a drag.
as an actor charles lane is n't the inheritor of charlie chaplin 's spirit.
cannot get room list.
horizontal separator width.
state court judge richard curry ordered edison to make average refunds of about $ 45 to $ 50 each to edison customers who have received electric service since april 1986 including about two million customers who have moved during that period.
image format unknown.
password.
attribute definition.
contains.
europe/luxembourg.
summary contains.
curl location.
could not create thumbnail for.
help options.
enter a conference server.
hangul compatibility jamo.
a subset of possible encodings are presented in the encoding submenu. this is a list of encodings to appear there. the special encoding name "current" means to display the encoding of the current locale.
error saving gconf tree to.
is not supported for this dialog.
consistency is key.
aiff audio.
but the same of the cement, brick and tile and match industries remained less than 60 percent.
save as.
negative output variable.
last used style.
maximum password age.
username port latest.
the forest sector became the major source of personal income for the cunning and shrewd people.
if possible, share with the others when buying in bulk.
yesterday sea containers ' chief executive officer james sherwood said in an interview that under the asset-sale plan sea containers would end up with a cash surplus of approximately $ 620 million.
debug window.
coordinate expression ended with an operator instead of an operand.
this memo list will be removed permanently.
stock icon.
the program traders on the other hand portray old-fashioned stock pickers as the neanderthals of the industry.
this option will authenticate with the nntp server using a plaintext password.
decision maker.
invalid evolution backup file.
lines.
younkers rang up sales in 1988 of $ 313 million.
the absence in data also prevented the formulation of a long range perspective planning within which the second plan was to operate.
service control.
cervia.
in reality, records of cultivated areas previously left out were adjusted after cadastral surveys which led to an increase in the crop farming area giving rise to inflated estimates of agricultural production.
scriptfu evaluation mode only allows noninteractive invocation.
in other transactions mr. simmons has followed friendly offers with a hostile tender offer.
-lrb- players have to be 35 or older except for catchers who are eligible at 32 because life behind the plate is so rough.
full name.
and then people started to downpour here from all over nepal.
procedure browser.
error writing to output file.
valdez.
america/martinique.
dominican republic.
guest session.
messages.
of course regulators would have to approve columbia 's reorganization.
essential.
in october 1988 3.7  said they would buy a house.
get the long doc string for a key.
if you close these images now, changes will be lost.
ottumwa.
go to previous photo.
dull blue.
take the traditional money managers or  stock pickers  as they are derisively known among the computer jockeys.
wheel turn left.
is not a valid value for focus attribute.
do not display a warning when the first change is made in readonly mode.
type.
the width of the main window.
bolzano.
high test scores on the other hand bring recognition and extra money a new computer lab for a school grants for special projects a bonus for the superintendent.
maximum width in characters.
an appeal is expected.
the message claims to contain a calendar, but the calendar is not a valid icalendar.
remove the log out item from the session menu.
secondly, as this methodology fixes the investment requirement based in incremental capital output ration with total disregard to economy in sectoral allocations and better resultoriented standards, it can not be utilized in the evaluation of alternative resource allocations and in the analysis of the effects of alternative investment plan on production, employment and other variables as a whole.
full name.
rhythmbox music player.
polythene pipes in view if the policy of expanding drinking water facilities, there will be an increase in the use of polythene pipes in the plan period.
idl document.
the deal also gave mitsui access to a high-tech medical product.
unknown.
server challenge invalid.
index.
create bezier curve.
plugin can't handle layer masks.
log in.
whether underline attribute is set.
randoms from seed shared.
basename of the default theme used by gtk.
tripoli.
paragraph background color as a possibly unallocated gdkcolor.
object properties.
kerrville.
oiapoque.
instance.
point hope.
display directories in configuration file.
cannot change the workspace layout on the screen the layout is already owned.
library prefix where gnome was installed.
the company is contesting the fine.
there was an error creating the child process for this terminal.
create a rule to filter messages to these recipients.
show notification icon options.
both sides have agreed that the talks will be most successful if negotiators start by focusing on the areas that can be most easily changed.
lambertville.
energy action.
stretch this document window to full screen.
rules hint.
structural adjustment loans form t he world bank and the international monetary fund will also be put to effective use.
asia/ashgabat.
hide tips.
symbol.
perpetual preferred shares are n't retractable by the holders the company said.
visible when overflown.
spatial filter radius.
generate from path.
stewart & stevenson services inc. said it received two contracts totaling $ 19 million *t*-1 to build gas-turbine generators.
contributing to the market 's reserved stance was the release later in the day of new data on the health of the u.s. economy in the form of the u.s. index of leading indicators.
opening configuration file.
show information about evolution.
appearance of the shadow that surrounds the container.
the filename contains symbols that are not allowed in filenames.
light purple.
and then this commercial produced by bob squier gets down to its own mean and dirty business.
format columns.
importing mailbox.
policy bases in the past, there existed a vast gulf between the target and the achievements of the plans.
one hundred and ninety two former greats near greats hardly knowns and unknowns begin a 72-game three-month season in spring-training stadiums up and down florida.
a good citizen must be large minded.
video conferencing url.
speaker with integrated amplifier.
small differences can be easily patched up or ironed out.
atlantic/reykjavik.
montpellier.
empty file.
saving to.
deactivated.
data socket connect timed out.
previous page.
multibit data.
threshold.
coronation.
inverted.
the discount rate on three-month treasury bills was essentially unchanged at 7.79  while the rate on six-month bills was slightly lower at 7.52  compared with 7.60  tuesday.
copy the location to the clipboard.
previous tip.
cosby  is down a full ratings point in the week of oct. 2-8 over the same week a year ago according to a.c. nielsen co.
the feelings of love and sympathy are driven out from the hearts of the people.
image title  statusbar format.
send options.
i was even given a good thrashing from my father from time to time.
labyrinth.
tools.
machine domain.
vertical spacing.
thus the total irrigated land is estimated to have reached 598,804 hectares, which forms 22.84 percent of the total cultivable land.
save the current file with a different name.
bizerte.
bonobo activation support.
unable to create temporary directory from template.
osha said there have been three worker fatalities at the two plants in the past two years and 17 deaths since 1972.
process/auxiliary operation.
klondike.
pick gray point.
telnet.
likewise this will also help in evaluating the probable effects on the economy from the probable growth in saving brought about by the favourable changes in the internal and external economic environment, reduction in unproductive government expenditure and the accelerated growth of investment in industries.
one such marvel is the aeroplane.
distort an image by whirling and pinching.
flat color fill.
check for new episodes.
hillsdale.
apply the scale/rotate/skew to each selected object separately otherwise, transform the selection as a whole.
show the actual objects when moving or transforming.
shadow type.
failed to load animation  reason not known, probably a corrupt animation file.
original password.
calculator.
normally open position switch horizontal.
unitholders will receive two additional 55 cents-a-unit distribution payments before the trust is liquidated in early 1990 the company said.
show message preview.
antialiased.
flip vertical.
mark for follow up.
unknown channel.
reset secret channel.
with japan's cash-flush banks aligned against it though raising money may be difficult.
column spacing.
among them, rivers are the most important water resources in nepal.
please select the information that you would like to import.
msx rom.
passport not verified.
always on top.
copy tracks from an audio cd with all associated information.
america/tijuana.
key comment.
pennsylvania.
enhanced meta file.
layout style.
winchester.
search ellipses, arcs, circles.
number, letter.
shenzhen.
close this window.
umlaut.
percent black.
null value.
show text information options.
modifier tone letters.
question options.
cannot parse integer value for.
ask each time.
centimeter.
host lookup failed.
hermiston.
during these years, the share of small and cottage industries in gross domestic product remained around 1 percent.
subprocess exited with an error  did you type your password correctly?
elizabethtown.
tourism is one of the mainstay of nepalese economy.
this is not a trivial issue.
but it 's building on a long tradition.
convert.
we feel very strongly that we really need action across the full range of issues we 've identified and we need it by next spring  mr. dallara says.
thus, the rapid growth in net foreign debts led to an increased burden on the economy.
algorithm parameters.
central european.
makepackageview error in arguments  two main widgets??
unique identifier for the icon entry. this will be used to save the history list.
focus line dash pattern.
banks could seek to recover payments to local authorities in instances where the banks made net payments to councils.
over 50 witnesses mostly students were interviewed.
implementation.
if you choose to delete the episode and file, they will be permanently lost. please note that you can delete the episode but keep the downloaded file by choosing to delete the episode only.
the time before hiding a submenu when the pointer is moving towards the submenu.
sales by these subsidiaries in the fiscal year ending last march were more than $ 17 billion.
raise the toolbox.
keep image's values.
in this connection, the plan has given special emphasis to a more rational allocation of resources, better management of public expenditures, enhanced mobilization of internal resources, greater performance in public sector investment and the strengthening of public enterprises, open and simple foreign exchange policies and regulations, and prudent fiscal and monetary policies.
besides, mass education on a large scale can be carried on by means of the radio.
documents/text markup.
for the nine months the company reported a net loss of $ 608,413 or 39 cents a share compared with year-earlier net income of $ 967,809 or 62 cents a share.
usenet news message.
rotate.
an exception occurred.
uninstalled schema ' from locale '.
home folder.
autodetected volume.
asia/choibalsan.
work email.
new folder.
the bill as it was approved by the house public works and transportation committee would give the transportation department up to 50 days * to review any purchase of 15  or more of the stock in an airline.
wakkanai.
samples the color from the pixel in the center of the brush.
mr. cray who could n't be reached for comment will work for the new colorado springs colo. company as an independent contractor the arrangement he had with cray research.
or was it because ms. collins had gone ?
replies.
metropolis.
whether this tag affects paragraph justification.
please enter a valid email address in the to field. you can search for email addresses by clicking on the to button next to the entry box.
suggests.
snippets.
external entity.
consequently, a system developed in which the center controlled the mechanism of regional development, which accorded a decisive role to the central development region creating an influx of a large population to it and making it the operation-site for the greatest number of development programmes.
treeview model.
unable to find the help files in either orplease check your installation.
in this context, the foreign exchange should be utilized positively and productively in order to increase productivity and employment opportunities in the economy.
expunge.
he has looked at 14 baseball and football stadiums and found that only one private dodger stadium brought more money into a city than it took out.
error removing contact.
mr. klauser says mitsui has 75 u.s. subsidiaries in which it holds 35  interest or more and the trading company hopes to double the number of its u.s. affiliates in 1990.
index arbitrage is a common form of program trading.
buddhism is another main religion.
your http proxy requires you to log in.
phone appliance.
quit nautilus.
namibia.
you are about to do something potentially harmful. to continue type in the phrase ?
pack type.
color exchange from color.
as the drains and small irrigation projects have a great significance in agriculture and also actively involve the farmers themselves, it is highly essential to  undertake such irrigation projects on a priority basis.
changsha.
already registered.
quoted string doesn't begin with a quotation mark.
willow.
could not display the folder.
goodland.
the following essential packages will be removed!
rear right.
edit your diagrams.
in the past, the plans did not pay required attention to these aspects, nor was an appropriate planning methodology used, the economic growth rate was determined in the initial stage of planning based on external variables.
further, as not much attention was paid to the proper alignment of the rode during construction, the roads have not able to intensify the economic activities of the people living in the road corridors.
we have no doubt this is one reason judges in new york and justices on the supreme court are willing to trash the law in the des cases.
asia/almaty.
le mans.
eau claire.
this has created tremendous hardships particularly in the livelihood if the people living below the poverty line.
handle position.
there is incredible pressure on school systems and teachers to raise test scores  says walt haney an education professor and testing specialist at boston college.
secondary dns.
reload package cache.
in addition, the expenditure under the economic services for the maintenance if physical infrastructures, which were created with large investment, remained low.
if i were choosing the people of tomorrow i would have chosen the people who are now on the board  he said.
error removing schema name from.
replace a string.
changes to privacy settings take effect immediately.
frame of.
he adds :  the market may be giving us another message that a recession is looming.
calendar view for a work week.
fujitsu and nec said they were still investigating and that knowledge of more such bids could emerge.
pattern selection.
unexpected.
openoffice.org drawing.
link to.
radioactive.
create the same proxies as a radio action.
the active gradient. click to open the gradient dialog.
mark the selected messages as not being junk.
cairo based rendering.
do not register the shell.
home page.
cannot create folder.
the action came in response to a petition filed by timex inc. for changes in the u.s. generalized system of preferences for imports from developing nations.
remove the fours.
use custom fonts.
broadview.
display text information dialog.
as an indicator of the tight grain supply situation in the u.s. market analysts said that late tuesday the chinese government which often buys u.s. grains in quantity turned instead to britain to buy 500,000 metric tons of wheat.
a password transition is needed.
dingbats.
agriculture is that sector which will be able to involve, although only for a short or medium period, the rapidly increasing labour force in productive activities.
use graphical smileys.
however, the country's basic structure if the economy is still very weak.
directory server.
percolate.
meanwhile the securities companies most of them smaller than the banks are seeking access only to limited kinds of banking that wouldn't open them to the full brunt of competition from the banks.
time in milliseconds between updates of the process view.
credits to the translators. this string should be marked as translatable.
there was an error parsing the menu definition from.
accordingly, the district development committee act 1992, the municipality act 1992 and the village development committee act, 1992 have been formulated and implemented.
moreover the fission produces dangerously radioactive waste.
browse.
while the minimum wage had traditionally been pegged at half the average u.s. manufacturing wage the level of $ 4.25 an hour in 1991 will still be less than 35  of average factory pay mr. williams said.
unicode block.
signing.
the file already exists. do you want to overwrite it?
rating.
log filter actions to the specified log file.
the scientists said they created small changes in the crystal-lattice structures of the superconductors to raise the amount of current that single crystals could carry to 600,000 amps per square centimeter in a moderately strong magnetic field.
shipments have been relatively level since january the commerce department noted.
recalculate.
sync and publish keys.
in any case opinion is mixed on how much of a boost the overall stock market would get even if dividend growth continues at double-digit levels.
see also.
selected link.
profile too long.
in september she pleaded guilty and paid a $ 500 fine.
a painting by august strindberg set a scandinavian price record when it sold at auction in stockholm for $ 2.44 million.
report.
reduction of regional imbalances a.
end event  terminate.
america/northdakota/center.
regarding drinking water, thermajority of the countryâ€™s population is deprived of the ac cess to clean drinking water facility.
camera.
user failed, server said.
key file contains invalid escape sequence.
detach and run in the background.
galician.
downloaded package files have been deleted.
bad file handle.
move tab to the right.
radius 1.
william r. breakey m.d. pamela j. fischer m.d. department of psychiatry johns hopkins university school of medicine baltimore a study by tulane prof. james wright says homelessness is due to a complex array of problems with the common thread of poverty.
stores.
whether this tag affects the right margin.
grab sensitivity.
mary beth marchand a greenville 11th grader also says mrs. yeargin inspired her to go into education.
data corrupted.
akrotiri.
the bank stocks got a boost when connecticut bank & trust and bank of new england said they no longer oppose pending legislation that would permit banks from other regions to merge with connecticut and massachusetts banks.
main window width.
error listing dirs.
you cannot rename a folder in a news store.
check to make the object insensitive not selectable by mouse.
subsequent to the formation of the imterim government, an understanding with india in may 1990 ended the trade impasse with india which had begun on march 23, 1989, reinstating the status quo ante in relationship with india.
it appears that you are using gimp for the first time. gimp will now create a folder named and copy some files to it.
kununurra.
extra times every.
cancel the removal of.
the construction of the east-west highway which was initiated in the panchayat regime was a multidimensional project for national development.
keymap.
the new carrier can tote as many as four cups at once.
florida.
add layer.
in a word he should be a perfect gentleman.
error initializing module '.
go to page.
test.
documents/plain text.
set custom canvas padding color.
tab pack type.
color profile information.
wasilla.
radial gradient center.
compose.
foreign assistance : as a result of the steps taken by the government towards eliminating the level of disparity between foreign aid commitments and their utilization, the committed foreign aid during 1990/91 is expected to have been fully utilized nearly to the extent of hundred percent.
equitable of iowa cos. des moines had been seeking a buyer for the 36-store younkers chain since june when it announced its intention to free up capital to expand its insurance business.
a program for drawing structured diagrams.
from these works economic development can be observed.
add buddy rejected.
reached at his office mr. mcfall currently chairman said  an implication that we failed to return investor funds is inappropriate and inaccurate.
true if the position property should be used.
he is an avid fan of a proposition on next week 's ballot to help build a replacement for candlestick park.
you have made modifications to this contact. do you want to save these changes?
lorillard inc. the unit of new york-based loews corp. that makes kent cigarettes stopped using crocidolite in its micronite cigarette filters in 1956.
failed to import gradients from.
africa/khartoum.
name of key theme rc file to load.
6.2 balance of payments situation :  although the balance of payments situation appeared favourable during f.y. 1990/91, the current account deficit was noticed to have increased considerably.
it is estimated that is this year there has been an increase in the production of animal feed, cotton cloth, jute goods, powder soap, cement, beer, battery, plastic and jute items.
use the environment variable to specify a different location.
but i did not worry as my school was near the bus interchange.
rwanda.
height.
the law defines unfairly low prices as ones below the cost of production or below prices in an exporter 's home market.
start offset.
muskegon.
remove obsolete package files after downloading new package lists.
deficit finance thus, the mobilistation of deficit finance became an important tool of resource mobilistation due to the decline in the revenue surplus and the lack of optimum utilization of foreign aid.
claresholm.
change the settings which affect the user interface.
tossing my bicycle to the side of the road, i ran to help them.
wine merchants ca n't keep roederer cristal in stock but they have to push salon le mesnil even lowering the price from $ 115 to $ 90.
enter password.
empathy can use the network to guess the location.
istres.
considered as a whole mr. lane said the filings required under the proposed rules  will be at least as effective if not more so for investors following transactions.
an aggressive ford bid for jaguar would put pressure on gm to make a better offer as the british company 's  white knight.
you must choose a longer password.
alan f. shugart currently chairman of seagate technology led the team that developed the disk drives for pcs.
fatal parse error in gradient file  not a gimp gradient file.
optical fiber.
electric command double coil.
africa/bamako.
default column order in the list view.
add in event data port.
archive has no control record.
the march and may contracts rose to fresh life-of-contract highs of 14.54 cents and 14.28 cents at their best levels of the day.
remove text from path.
treemodel column containing the row span values.
new appointment.
missing protocol plugin for.
the six of clubs.
multilayer switch.
vertical rest.
file not found.
transport and communication 3.1 transport a.
leo melamed merc executive committee chairman said that the 12-point limit appeared to lessen the selling panic oct. 13.
the movies of tv shows should be very much restricted and for a fix time.
vert. spacing.
document properties.
install.
nigeria.
bad file format.
it 's fueled by the increasing profitability of major-league teams.
maximize vertically the window.
a short account of the content of this document.
divided by.
use separator.
asia/dili.
bolivia.
show options to modify properties of a screen.
font style as a pangostyle, e.g. pangostyleitalic.
view information about your network.
ambler.
in the past they say the strongest dividend growth has often come at times when the stock-market party was almost over.
terms were n't disclosed.
virtual layer switch.
split segments uniformly.
evolution preferences.
homeless people not only lack safety privacy and shelter they also lack the elementary necessities of nutrition cleanliness and basic health care.
novosibirsk.
pack.
whether the border should be shown or not.
the permissions of the file.
magna said mr. mcalpine resigned to pursue a consulting career with magna as one of his clients.
despite a deluge of economic news the treasury market remained quiet but the corporate market was abuzz over international business machines corp. 's huge debt offering.
open a file.
america/kentucky/louisville.
unlocks a secure shell key.
whether the label is drawn with the selected font size.
scale.
mount vernon.
corporations like contel denounce program trading yet contel has in the past hired pension fund managers like bankers trust co. that are also big program traders.
before trusting this ca for any purpose, you should examine its certificate and its policy and procedures if available.
no default action associated.
but in london and tokyo where computer-driven trading now plays a small but growing role traders say a number of hurdles loom.
block only the users below.
save tool options now.
search in character details.
show buddies awaiting authorization.
during this period, regular expenditure will, according to the estimate, grow by 20.1 percent at current prices and 4.3 percent at constant prices.
name of entity responsible for making this document available.
there still persists the problem of maintaining the academic calendar, which has as adverse effect on students' future.
depends on.
a the final year of the first fiveyear plan 19561961 was 1960/61.
from january to october the nation 's accumulated exports increased 4  from the same period last year to $ 50.45 billion.
goes to previous word.
reset the text to its original size.
australia/sydney.
couldn't read text info.
common defines.
unable to change station uri to as that station already exists.
paste size.
attributes.
as far as the railway transport is concerned, the progress was absolutely nil.
lens distortion.
right paren.
there is not enough disk space to save the file. please free some disk space and try again.
searching for entries using filter.
exchange.
pixmap directory.
following the acquisition of r.p. scherer by a buy-out group led by shearson lehman hutton earlier this year the maker of gelatin capsules decided to divest itself of certain of its non-encapsulating businesses.
at constant prices the figures thus stood at 1.8 percent and 1.7 percent respectively.
line directive.
invert.
transparency of the color.
while there were no one-time gains or losses in the latest period there was a one-time gain of # 18 million in the 1988 period.
sørkjosen.
letter, lowercase.
the lack of qualitative development in education is the main reason for this situation.
bottom neighbor.
the next morning with a police escort busloads of executives and their wives raced to the indianapolis motor speedway unimpeded by traffic or red lights.
switch to workspace 3.
select by.
waves.
she said the move would result in a after-tax charge of less than $ 4 million to be spread over the next three quarters.
memory and swap history.
the government will invest in the creation of infrastructure of industry and tourism, and provide support to the private sector.
metering mode.
invert mask.
removed trusted key.
this will produce a comparative advantages especially in energy -oriented industries and irrigated cultivable land.
multiple unseen messages.
landor associates : young & rubicam said it completed its acquisition of landor associates a san francisco identity-management firm.
selection bound.
besides, the creation of a favorable environment for private sector will also stimulate growth in domestic savings.
button left.
the mill owes farmers around rs 110 million.
change selected text to upper case.
default route.
distort the image with waves.
meanwhile the bad bank with the junk bonds and some capital might be spun off *-1 to columbia shareholders including mr. spiegel who might then have a new career investors say.
while executing the small irrigation projects, the concerned agency will have to explain clearly about cash voluntary labour and repair and maintenance expenses to be borne by the users ' committee, and should execute the project after getting written agreement from them on these provisions, construction expenses of the project will be operated by joint signature of the person nominated by the users' committee and the technical representative of the executing agency.
in robert whiting 's  you gotta have wa  macmillan 339 pages $ 17.95 the beatles give way to baseball in the nipponese version we would be hard put to call a  game.
subcontractors will be offered a settlement and a swift transition to new management is expected to avert an exodus of skilled workers from waertsilae marine 's two big shipyards government officials said.
specifies the scale of the texture in percent of original file.
reinstall.
could not interpret shape file.
the police can cooperate with the school in this respect.
horizontal base.
device.
group name.
workers described  clouds of blue dust  that hung over parts of the factory even though exhaust fans ventilated the area.
oshkosh truck corp. oshkosh wis. estimated earnings for its fourth quarter ended sept. 30 fell 50  to 75  below the year-earlier $ 4.5 million or 51 cents a share.
gnome app prefix.
his life including his skirmishes with a competing sketch artist seems carefree.
with a view to eliminating the disparity between investment plan and targets and making the plan more realistic, the plan should frame an investment programme using appropriate techniques, based on the proper assessment of all viable alternatives, similarly, and estimate needs to be made with regard to the availability of resources as well as the growth rate likely to be achieved during the plan period on the basis of alternative sectoral plans.
selective load settings.
shrink from image border.
in order to achieve the principal objectives mentioned above, it has become essential to improve economic standard of rural people the achieve self-sustaining rural development through the increased provision of social, economic and market services, and increased access to drinking water and alternative forms of energy.
red eye removal.
smaller values give a more accurate selection border but may introduce holes in the selection.
yellow.
today, it is a different scenario altogether.
fatal parse error in gradient file  file is corrupt in line.
paragraph background color as a string.
those dividend bulls argue that corporations are in the unusual position of having plenty of cash left over after paying dividends and making capital expenditures.
all supported archives.
the appropriate allocations and utilization of resources, economic liberalization and other policy reforms will contribute further towards the attainment of the economic growth rate of 5.1 percent in the eighth plan period.
by.
package was not found while processing file dependencies.
exclaim.
symbol, math.
richard stoltzman has taken a gentler more audience-friendly approach.
therefore, during the eighth plan period, foreign assistance will be sought only for such priority projects which may not be sustained through internal resources and due attention will be paid to ensuring the maximum effectiveness in the utilization of the assistance.
due to continuingly high gold prices tied to uncertainty about the u.s. currency investor interest was directed toward oil and mining shares which traders called a  defensive  action frequently taken when the dollar is expected to fall or during times of inflation.
that 's a departure from their traditional practice of transferring almost all financing risks to investors.
at the same time, the genetic diversity of agricultural crops will be utilized for the development of exportoriented products.
similarly, appropriate steps have been taken by the popularly elected government in the direction of creating a favourable climate for the development of the private sector.
they economy had to face serious problems due to imbalance between resource mobilisation and expenditure, imbalance between savings and investments and between export and import and the lack of control over population growth.
lharc archive.
the directory is diverted.
realaudio/video document.
attribute name.
reinstall.
nagasaki.
the truth is that bitter disappointment awaits the majority of young hopefuls.
statistics.
if true, the selected month cannot be changed.
the local election has thus successfully laid down the foundation for a democratic system and the local bodies have now initiated the tradition of playing an important role in development activities in consonance with the policy of decentralization.
show role field in the event/task/meeting editor.
he also said that after the charges and  assuming no dramatic fluctuation in interest rates the company expects to achieve near-record earnings in 1990.
current view is a customized view.
by unicode block.
the purchasing management association of chicago 's october index rose to 51.6  after three previous months of readings below 50.
it is one of the most glorious phenomenons of nature.
click to open.
tanana.
column.
a cover is open on the printer “”.
could not parse shade factor in shaded color.
unable to resolve dependencies! giving up.
categories list.
macros.
with altitudes and ethnicity, the dances of nepal slightly change in style as well as in the costumes.
cannot allocate slot for encryption bulk key.
upper.
the accessible layer of this object.
/conversation/view log.
true if the command used to handle this type of url should be run in a terminal.
voltage.
physical progress situation 1.
it was a big city with small houses and few people.
the u.s. along with britain and singapore left the agency when its anti-western ideology financial corruption and top leadership got out of hand.
trevico.
copy email address.
windows icon image.
tile width.
if the transparency key has the value color, then this key determines the color which is used for indicating transparency.
study environment can be made less mundane and monotonous by introducing outdoor learning experience.
reload current theme.
a few blocks away at the u.s. ambassador 's residence the guards encircling the compound also had discarded their uzi-model arms for the first time since early june.
on this computer.
layer cannot be lowered more.
add to the list of active filters.
search for the contact.
the life standard of people does not change without the developmental activities.
brandon.
configure input controller.
default thumbnail icon size.
we spent the whole day just watching the rescue workers at work.
you 've got to make those savings now.
login options.
when i looked our the window, the day looked cheerful and the sky was bright and sunny.
'jump' output variable.
ellipse.
missing name.
bad key or directory name.
randomized.
initializing stream.
no reason given.
multiply rand. value 0,1.
divisions.
luxeuillesbains.
superscripts and subscripts.
can't restore  your changes are in.
the same goes for training expenditures in such fields as agriculture, cooperatives, cadastral survey and the like.
development work is very important for the progress of the country.
but a takeover battle opens up the possibility of a bidding war with all that implies.
this name can be set if you want a custom name for the home icon on the desktop.
pacific/kwajalein.
notes.
create directories.
buddies.
despite the supreme court 's refusal to hear the case there are serious constitutional issues of due process and uncompensated takings from the defendants.
try moving cards down from the foundation.
for delivering mail by connecting to a remote mailhub using smtp.
maximum width.
the number as well as the quality of educational institutions is also different in different development regions.
america/juneau.
show animations.
the people from this generation invent their own jobs rather than searching for one.
copy to the clipboard.
kaduna.
subject contains.
dubrovnik.
link target.
xft dpi.
safety advocates including some members of congress have been urging the department for years to extend car-safety requirements to light trucks and vans which now account for almost one-third of all vehicle sales in the u.s.
perform all pending installs and removals.
issued to subject.
channel founder.
primerica closed at $ 28.25 down 50 cents.
roberval.
itc officials said final commerce department and itc rulings wo n't come until next march or later.
this aptitude does not have super cow powers.
this evidently led to increasingly heavy reliance on foreign savings in order to bear the burden of the increased investment.
acquisition : ketchum communications pittsburgh acquired braun & co. a los angeles investor-relations and marketing-communications firm.
similarly, while each tourist during his stay in nepal spent  24.00 in 1961/62, the level of expenditure remained unchanged in 1989/90.
could not create temporary file for.
greek and coptic.
whether to display the column.
color for misspelled words.
in fact we should spend less in times of inflation.
there is something to be said for a more leisurely pace of life.
instead of increasing our happiness, it has brought death, miseries, and destruction in the world.
it can be said that the trend of financial improvement has been firmly set  he added.
set the entry text.
research has shown that many students do not use the computer wisely.
sheets and objects.
the recent disarray in the junk bond market suggests that brokers may become longer-term creditors than they anticipated and may face long delays  in getting their money back says jeffrey bowman a vice president at s&p which raised a warning flag for the industry in april when it downgraded cs first boston.
png image.
view the online help.
pacific/portmoresby.
waiting for headers.
all white.
dibrugarh.
fall ballot issues set a record for off-year elections.
conflicts with.
palette.
invalid date.
ellipsize set.
notwithstanding the fact that without peopleâ€™s faith and commitment no planned development can manifest into meaningful reality and nor can any sustainable change oriented to peopleâ€™s welfare be brought about in the economic structure, a revolutionary economic programme of land reform was introduced in the very beginning of the panchayat regime.
extension mismatch.
paste in place.
orangeburg.
occurrences.
make the window not below other windows.
enable preview to obtain the file size.
receives default.
filter.
the loan disbursement of the commercial banks increased at 17.8 percent per annum during this period.
supplemental mathematical operators.
using internal algorithm.
the record of companies that have diversified is n't all that impressive  he says.
unoptimize.
zinder.
do you want to try to replace it with the one you are saving?
password authentication bypassed.
symbolic size to use for stock icon, icon set or named icon.
the next province ? anything 's possible how about the new guinea fund ?
no longer available.
in a 1985 advisory to educators mcgraw-hill said scoring high should n't be used because it represented a  parallel form  of the cat and ctbs tests.
received invalid value in set request.
the magazine 's editors ran a giant diagram of the product with arrows pointing to the packaging 's polystyrene foam polyproplene and polyester film all plastic items they say are non-biodegradable.
focus linewidth.
orange city.
such is hardly the case.
depending upon the suitability of climatic conditions and access to services, agricultural diversification in cash crops, horticultures, vegetable farming and livestock will be emphasized.
row.
name/email.
televised serials and programmes are replacing craze.
in a separate report the department said construction spending ran at an annual rate of $ 415.6 billion not significantly different from the $ 415.8 billion reported for august.
too long message.
source code patch.
dateedit flags.
browse.
people have constant access to decision making and power.
merging.
in the classroom students say mrs. yeargin distinguished herself by varying teaching approaches forcing kids to pair up to complete classroom work or using college-bowl type competitions.
pressing  or  scales selection up or down by this increment in px units.
about gimp.
asia/qatar.
on the agricultural front, the development of market-oriented production pattern is necessary for the growth in integrated and coordinated manner to agricultural inputs, services, incentives and irrigation facilities.
error writing header to contents file.
linear.
his wife also works for the paper as did his father.
song position slider.
open an existing document.
officials of triton could n't be reached for comment.
global buffer.
we i assume you 're in this with me at this point need to get three words  for examination only  eliminated from the law.
remove guide.
chemical.
the company does not feel that it or any of the individuals violated any criminal statute and the company expects full vindication in court.
no default.
i have a right to print those scripts if i go there and laboriously but no longer surreptitiously copy them out in long hand.
please enter your new password.
randomize the horizontal scale by this percentage.
air quality detector.
moreover, since the immediate as well as long-term effects of a project of such a great magnitude were not take into full consideration, the terai region has now had to bear the brunt of the natural as well as ma n-made disasters like drought and floods due to excessive migration, haphazard human settlements and the degradation of the churiya region and the charkoshe jhari (the forest belt of the terai), once acclaimed as the treasure house of forest resources.
we had warned of the precarious situation to the road department long before.
the share of government consumption is expected to increase only moderately from 11.5 percent of the  gross domestic product in 1991/92 to 12.6 percent of the gross domestic product in 1996/97.
x alignment of the column header text or widget.
pierce.
fractal trace.
no drawops provided for frame piece.
decompressing archive.
policy violation.
the modeling technique will make it possible to assess the prevailing or the likely negative influence on the economy of low productivity, supply and structural constraints, lack of prudence in the allocation and utilization of resources and the unnecessary government interfence in various economic sectors.
power transducer.
social services 4.1.
inverness.
scale 1.
select theme folders.
coordinate expression contains floating point number which could not be parsed.
chart.
new carlisle.
redundant object.
file may not contain newlines.
the additional technology personnel training and promotional effort can be expensive.
create cosmic recursive fractal flames.
baudette.
game boy rom.
ellipse select.
gtk im status style.
protocol.
delay between frames where unspecified.
failed to add data to encoder.
you can see the butterflies mating.
maltese cross.
private sector will be encouraged to actively involve in the development and expansion of irrigation facility.
union square.
link speed.
applying lens.
bonds due in 2005 have a 7 1/2  coupon and are priced at par.
remove trailing spaces.
display the next thread.
they are our version of the east bloc 's nomenklatura and they have absolutely no wish to see anything change.
the end of the first half however brought what the standing-room-only crowd seemed to be waiting for : the pop singer judy collins who appears on  inner voices.
the teacher's aim is to develop the full potential of each child.
no hint available.
user interface.
horizontal padding.
in a meeting with premier li peng on monday mr. nixon said that he hoped he would n't encounter guards with machine guns during his visit to the u.s. embassy.
meanwhile traders in tokyo say that the prospect of lower u.s. interest rates has spurred dollar buying by japanese institutions.
parents must urge their children to eat more vegetables, fruits, juices, wholemeal and wholegrain foods.
in the 1970s scientists reported cancer cases among the daughters of des users.
cannot delete folder  invalid operation.
still many economists are n't predicting a recession anytime soon.
reset and clear.
unable to open the drafts folder for this account. use the system drafts folder instead?
service not available.
select the filter/format out of.
policy makers regard the youth wage as helping to limit the loss of jobs from an increase in the minimum wage but they have lately touted it as necessary *-2 to help impart job skills to entrants into the work force.
draw a labyrinth.
encapsulated postscript using pango fonts.
thus, the share of the private sector investment is estimated to reach 64.1 of gross fixed investment during the eighth plan period.
invert the picked value.
tree level.
variety is the spice of life.
enthalpy transducer.
search stars and polygons.
workgroup director.
directory exists.
valid signature, but cannot verify sender.
however it has n't yet made any proposals to shareholders.
the parent of younkers after failing to find a buyer for the chain of midwestern department stores said it will sell a stake in the chain to management and take other steps to reduce its investment in retailing.
sample colorize.
message.
opacity.
gnumeric spreadsheet.
proxy type.
geometry.
buddy ticker.
clickdrag to create a new selection.
besides, there was tremendous pressure on price following an increased money supply at an average if 21 percent per annum because of the big increase in government expenditure during the seventh plan (1989- 90) period.
first five year plan serious efforts to plan economic development took place after the establishment of a planning board in 1955.
he must love his neighbours.
in this connection, the regular budget will be streamlined in respect of government expenditure, revenue will be increased through appropriate monetary and fiscal policies the growth rate of money supply will be maintained within desirable limits and efforts will be made to increase exports through product diversification.
minimum size.
asia/jayapura.
no hierarchy information to edit.
intersection.
click to burn.
no one speaks and the snaking of the ropes seems to make as much sound as the bells themselves muffled by the ceiling.
necessary infrastructure will be built for the development of rural irrigation, drinking water, electricity,.
america/rankininlet.
no servers available.
mrs. yeargin declined.
enable debug.
zoom 11.
out of the rs 70 million allocated to the private sector, rs 25 millions were al resettlement and industrial development loans.
all information.
commonwealth edison now faces an additional court-ordered refund on its summer/winter rate differential collections that the illinois appellate court has estimated at $ 140 million.
the company said that because of softening sales it is n't in compliance with requirements that it maintain $ 3 million in working capital.
save.
the people are the asset of the country.
showers of small hail.
portrait.
center on vertical axis.
intent.
as sent folder.
image has of course a great deal to do with what sells and what does n't and it ca n't be forced.
during the war there is hatred and ill feeling everywhere.
the rapid increase in population leaves only an insignificant portion of resources for development works.
if you proceed, all proxy accounts will be deleted permanently.
key is not a list.
the remaining $ 21.9 billion could be raised through the sale of short-term treasury bills two-year notes in november and five-year notes in early december the treasury said.
right cardinality.
to polar.
heating oil for november delivery ended at 58.64 cents a gallon up one cent on the new york mercantile exchange.
select objects to make a bitmap copy.
while planning for irrigation development, it is also necessary to maintain coordination between irrigation and agricultural production programmes towards achieving maximum benefit.
enable search highlighting.
right control.
about.
move the current document to a new window.
socialism, as conceived by the nepali congress, it not orthodox socialism where the state dictates but the one by virtue of which the state in a supportive role will bring about social and economic justice through increase in production, creation of employment and special programmes directed towards the upliftment of the socially and economically deprived poor people who are left out of the mainstream of development.
at least one image is needed to compose.
it is expected that the  adoption of liberal economic policies will increase the growth rate of investment from the private sector.
gnome desktop environment.
could not open file.
invalid ltype on.
default sort order.
insufficient rights.
cartwright.
keyboard shortcut to create a new profile.
unable to initialize gtk.
use glib types guint8.
size of transportation vehicles have increased but the size of the road remains the same.
hence, a situation arose, where sufficient number of schools could not be increased in comparison to the increase in the number of students.
open system.
broken clouds.
would you like to send meeting invitations to participants?
edit stroke.
splash screen.
couldn't find which child the server was listed in.
new layer.
default grid.
mr. mayor's hope that references to  press freedom  would survive unamended seems doomed to failure ; the current phrasing is  educating the public and media to avoid manipulation.
unknown type.
the programmes receiving priority in this plan are a agricultural intensification and diversification it is being increasingly realized that the contribution of agriculture to the overall economic development of the nation is not only determined by the growth rate of agriculture but also by its pattern.
next chapter/movie.
move partition to the right.
twist or smear image in many different ways.
additional input controllers.
the first major cause of mass destruction of the rainforest is logging.
fatal parse error in brush file  file appears truncated.
sobel vertically.
japanese investment in southeast asia is propelling the region toward economic integration.
however, while it was predestined that there would be no going "back to the village" without the decentralization of power, the construction of infrastructure for rural development and the creation of employment opportunities, this genuine movement instead if being utilized in development programmes was developed into a system of political evaluation of panchayat workers and a means of orienting them towards position of power.
lower hour.
in 1975 mr. pamplin enticed mr. hahn into joining the company as executive vice president in charge of chemicals ; the move befuddled many in georgia-pacific who did n't believe a university administrator could make the transition to the corporate world.
hebrew.
center of brush.
the total number of pages in the document.
a couple of weeks ago i lost the case in federal district court in des moines.
other address.
nairobi.
thinning.
could not connect to connection timed out.
america/halifax.
after all, own cooked food is tastier, cleaner, and healthier with less oil and additives.
doubleeffect jack.
in 1970 mr. hahn called in state police to arrest student protesters who were occupying a university building.
james a. white contributed to this article.
do not use x server only process files from console.
goes to next blockquote.
gdkpixbufanimation to display.
katakana phonetic extensions.
absorbed in doling out  feeding frenzy 's  tidbits the authors gloss over the root causes of wedtech namely the section 8 a federal program under whose auspices the scandal took place.
temple also said sea containers ' plan raises  numerous legal regulatory financial and fairness issues  but did n't elaborate.
optical energy.
create a checkerboard pattern.
edit channel attributes.
but coleco bounced back with the introduction of the cabbage patch dolls whose sales hit $ 600 million in 1985.
by conversation count.
vertical shift per row in  of tile height.
forward the selected message to someone.
create/delete.
fatal parse error.
cut selection to clipboard.
the message does contain a calendar, but the calendar contains no events, tasks or free/busy information.
failed to execute helper program.
company phone.
finished downloading podcast.
america/belem.
bratsk.
could not display help.
i 've never seen so many people crying in one place at one time  said bill johnson an assistant city editor.
add tearoffs to menus.
the item in the calendar is not valid.
show hint about closing the main window.
cannot save changes to account.
ciscoworks workstation.
selection size is not even. tileable maze won't work perfectly.
macron.
user defined signal 2.
duplicate.
yellowknife.
marietta.
the snatch thief was never apprehended and i doubt i will ever see him again.
torrent files.
gradients.
empty the play queue before adding new tracks.
dialog frontend is incompatible with emacs shell buffers.
bandare bushehr.
audio cd player.
show close button on dialogs.
delete current layer.
examinations are also used as a yardstick for measuring the capability of the candidate.
failed to rename mailbox.
a senior justice department official however said the administration is n't worried about the aba rating.
this hasn't much bothered the unesco delegates who last week couldn't even agree to raise funds by selling off a fancy 19th-century french chateau the agency somehow owns.
-rrb- and there's pride.
during the eighth plan period, the rate of inflation will be maintained below 9 percent in average by reducing the increasing liquidity of the economy and by adopting other appropriate monetary and fiscal policy measures.
user information.
ralston purina co. reported a 47  decline in fourth-quarter earnings reflecting restructuring costs as well as a more difficult pet food market.
you are jolted by a surge of electricity! more.
in may university patents filed a suit in federal court in philadelphia against albert m. kligman a researcher and professor at the university of pennsylvania school of medicine who developed retin-a in the 1960s to combat acne.
chièvres.
it is certainly not an easy task to accelerate the pace of development in a distorted economic, social and administrative milieu created by the panchayat regime during the last thirty years.
split segments at midpoints.
hollow diamond.
upgrading system.
replicate gradient selection.
dansville.
resize window on image size change.
sending ping requests to.
renton.
america/manaus.
configuration file is.
test again.
save failed.
tips and tricks.
whether this tag affects the font size.
polar coordinates.
it is a folly to think that only physically able people can make one's country and nation proud.
which is a virtual package.
couldn't open for writing.
joplin.
posting failed.
select items from the list.
align and distribute.
multiple descriptions found for group ignoring one.
process information shown in list.
it teaches people to progress from traditional superstition based values to modern ones.
high hardware integrity.
animate.
alternate.
bitrate.
failed to open connection to bus.
light green.
this message is signed and is valid meaning that it is very likely that this message is authentic.
however, there are many benefits one can gain through volunteering.
analysts said the fall in pretax profit was due to the group 's recent restructuring and sale of peripheral units and that its remaining businesses are performing well.
long before 1960, railways and ropeways were established in nepal.
companies would be compelled to publish in annual proxy statements the names of insiders who fail to file reports on time.
gtar archive.
the package cache was built for a different architecture.
cannot change nick.
this helps to assess the probable effects of alternative investment programme on the economy.
could not create.
different fills.
many farmers probably would n't sell until prices rose at least 20 cents a bushel said lyle reed president of chicago central & pacific railroad co. of waterloo iowa.
volume in the second section was estimated at 18 million shares up from 14 million tuesday.
search folders automatically updated.
for this purpose, it is necessary to develop and mobilize human resources from the village level, to develop and extend the infrastructure for rural development and to attain minimum standard of living for the common rural populace.
and their suspicions of each other run deep.
cape verde.
trace.
schema ' specified for ' stores a nonschema value.
xbase database.
error while deleting.
max depth.
if a user tries to open 10 or more messages at one time, ask the user if they really want to do it.
sao tome and principe.
perhaps none of the unconstitutional conditions contained in the appropriations bills for fiscal 1990 better illustrates congress 's attempt to usurp executive power than section 609 of the executive-office bill :  none of the funds made available pursuant to the provisions of this act shall be used to implement administer or enforce any regulation which has been disapproved pursuant to a resolution of disapproval duly adopted in accordance with the applicable law of the united states.
a user on the computer is trying to remotely view or control your desktop.
braunschweig.
cancel pending actions.
caribou.
lens distortion.
scriptfu procedure browser.
five point star.
east  southeast.
in order to make use of all feasible development prospects, the eights plan has accorded special priority to the overall development of this sector.
dash pattern.
rotational energy.
click or press enter to crop.
file exists but cannot overwrite it.
getting active internet connections.
canadian english.
typing a message.
the country could not make qualitative advance in the field of education as a result of the new education system; instead, there was further deteoriation.
sense is not understood, try true or false.
of the agency's 2,750 staff members 230 are in the field working on actual projects such as literacy and oceanographic research.
redding.
configfiles.
factory shipments fell 1.6  to $ 234.4 billion after rising 5.4  in august.
class scope.
are you sure you want to delete this appointment?
letter rotation.
updating.
theme folders.
appointment.
popt flags.
property not found.
their immense power pulverizes any rocks in their path.
move a build of cards on to the empty tableau slot.
dia is documented by.
interface.
you are not allowed to open this file.
red lake.
shishmaref.
the agricultural sector alone contributes about three fifths of the gross national product and provides employment to nearly eight tenths of the entire population.
create images and edit photographs.
the indexers ' strategy for the moment is to hunker down and let the furor die.
you must log in to access.
parsons.
voice, lossless.
rotate tiles by this angle for each row.
america/merida.
show active image.
resolving address.
whether the eventtrapping window of the eventbox is above the window of the child widget as opposed to below it.
permission denied.
blue phaseshift.
enable action keys.
backing up to the folder.
volume.
keyword.
open pages as.
cursor position.
raise to top.
copy an object.
your password has been changed.
gross domestic product a revised estimate indicates that the per capita income in 1990/91 reached rs. 1736 at 1974/75 constant prices.
wednesday 's dominant issue was yasuda fire & marine insurance which continued to surge on rumors of speculative buying.
custom.
most of the volume came from trades designed to capture the stock 's next dividend ; texaco has a yield of 5.6  and goes ex-dividend today.
new contact list.
lightness.
create and edit gradients.
in the new position he will oversee mazda 's u.s. sales service parts and marketing operations.
tells the running screensaver process to lock the screen immediately.
totem movie player.
server is going down abandon ship.
upgraded system.
product.
riverton.
the report offered new evidence that the nation 's export growth though still continuing may be slowing.
millville.
distribute.
another concern : the funds ' share prices tend to swing more than the broader market.
fatal error in resolver.
duplicate window.
baton rouge.
display the next important message.
hanamaki.
kids passport without parental consent.
go up one level.
edward l. kane succeeded mr. taylor as chairman.
submit a bug report using bug buddy.
scale options.
source code.
the file doesn't exist, please check if gnomenettool is correctly installed.
property has invalid type.
talkeetna.
paducah.
add contact.
font family.
geneva.
the reruns have helped ratings at many of the 187 network affiliates and independent tv stations that air the shows.
reuters holdings plc said michael reupke resigned as general manager to pursue unspecified interests a move the news organization termed an  amicable separation.
do i have much sympathy for her ?
owatonna.
internal error, problem resolver broke stuff.
loopback interface.
swap fill and stroke.
foreground color set to.
decades back it was the last word for the creation of energy.
download in progress. do you want to save the task?
15th.
birthday.
each clone is painted by the picked color the original must have unset fill or stroke.
reminder!
a sec proposal to ease reporting requirements for some company executives would undermine the usefulness of information on insider trades as a stock-picking tool individual investors and professional money managers contend.
blur outward.
rippling.
address book properties.
exit the program.
accepts tab.
bad command exec to launch.
if checked the mapping will begin at the right side, as opposed to beginning at the left.
they also said that more than a dozen presidents have called for line-item veto authority since the civil war and  all have shared the view that such lawmaking power is beyond the reach  of the president.
loading.
start of appointment.
hex grid.
the greatest advantage in reading is when one comes across great minds.
17th.
diskusage.
dodge/burn.
wrap.
can't get and set/unset simultaneously.
activate.
file chooser.
but regulators are wary.
whether you thought the economy was growing weak or holding steady yesterday 's economic indicators did n't change your opinion  said charles lieberman a managing director at manufacturers hanover securities corp.
much of the 800 service will  migrate to 900  predicts jack lawless general manager of us sprint 's 900 product.
search for keys containing.
he should try to collect funds for spending on welfare schemes for his city.
whether the toolbar should be visible in editing windows.
also on the takeover front jaguar 's adrs rose 1/4 to 13 7/8 on turnover of 4.4 million.
new window.
khabarovsk.
create a progress widget.
in addition it is believed to offer a cost-sharing mechanism that would help subsidize the clean-up costs for the dirtiest coal-fired utilities in the country sparing their customers from exorbitant jumps in their electric bills.
sort on value.
predepends.
top of window.
left single quote.
set the dialog text.
no patterns available for use with this tool.
couldn't find font family for.
toggles whether to have all day event.
georgia-pacific 's sales climbed to $ 9.5 billion last year compared with $ 6 billion in 1983 when mr. hahn took the reins.
header 1.
readonly file system.
the default action is to keep your current version.
clear history.
go to the previous visited location.
as a result, the planning process lacked accountability and was unable to induce genuine popular participation.
is missing.
open with.
unsigned.
from the 1940s until 1971 some two million women took the synthetic hormone diethylstilbestrol des to prevent miscarriages and morning sickness.
list of labels and their associated colors.
projects with less cost per hectare will be selected after the survey of potential projects requested by the farmer.
europe/samara.
default appearance in normal mode.
foreign trade and balance of payments situation: 6.1 foreign trade : as a result of the trade impasse with india, the share of the trade with india in total foreign trade was  only 22.7 percent in 1989/90, which increased to 28.5 percent in 1991/92 following the improvement in nepal-india relations subsequent to the people's movement of 1990.
a style called has not been defined.
the nepal himalayan has been an attraction to many people, be they saints, philosophers, researchers or adventures.
friedrichshafen.
provided by.
divide.
apply lens.
an appointment in the calendar conflicts with this meeting.
communication in simple language can be defined as the exchange of news, views and ideas from one person to another person.
lambda.
mark citations in the message "preview".
recompose.
merge visible layers.
prescott.
nec released a statement saying  we feel sorry for having caused trouble to society  a form of apology common in japan for companies caught in embarrassing situations.
scanning for open ports.
too many open files.
torrent options.
use system fonts.
the capacity utilization of some selected industries was about 63 percent during the period from 1975/76 to 1989/90.
recovering autosaved diagrams.
sound recorder.
wind is probably the greatest single cause of erosion.
the white house previously insisted on an unrestricted six-month training wage that could be paid any time a worker of any age took a new job.
under the offer shareholders will receive one right for each 105 common shares owned.
remove unused colors from colormap.
shorter maturities are considered a sign of rising rates because portfolio managers can capture higher rates sooner.
the supreme court 's decision in ins v. chadha held that legislative vetoes are unconstitutional.
harbor springs.
the strokes follow a "flowing" pattern.
remove overlaps.
wrap comment after this length.
bradford.
import a single file.
no colors.
the committee 's members are worried what all this free food might do to the economic prospects of poland 's own farmers.
move or copy files previously selected by a cut or copy command into the selected folder.
current topic is.
no set for theme.
optional comment describing key.
nicotine contained in cigarette smoke reduces the activity of the brain and nervous system.
cuernavaca.
draw background.
presence.
mr. wilder did introduce such legislation 17 years ago but he did so at the request of a constituent a common legislative technique used by lawmakers.
muscle shoals.
slash.
megabytes.
however the junk-bond market has collapsed in recent weeks lessening the likelihood that such a transaction would succeed.
charles bradford an analyst with merrill lynch capital markets said usx may have received orders lost by competitors who were involved in labor contracts earlier this year.
no such message.
we do n't spend much on print advertising  she says.
federal national mortgage association -lrb- fannie mae -rrb- : posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days -lrb- priced at par -rrb- 9.75  standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.75  6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages.
pixels at.
unable to correct missing packages.
transport.
scroll left.
plasma.
restart evolution after restore.
tritanopia insensitivity to blue.
rename layer.
the specialists see any step to electronic trading as a death bell.
could not open temporary mail file.
make this occurrence movable.
fortran 95.
clickdrag to subtract from the current selection.
no password file.
if the market goes down i figure it 's paper profits i 'm losing.
there is finally some sort of sense in the market  she says.
the increase in money supply during the plan period will be lim ited to 12.1 percent per annum, which will help in limiting inflation to about 9 percent.
the school bell goes off to signal the start of the twenty-minute recess period.
lower the current layer.
foreground color.
jaguar a u.k. luxury auto maker being pursued by ford motor and general motors gained 10 pence 16 cents a share to close at 879 pence $ 13.90.
before the usx case osha 's largest proposed fine for one employer was $ 4.3 million for alleged safety violations at john morrell & co. a meatpacking subsidiary of united brands co. cincinnati.
speech will not be used.
check to make sure your password is spelled correctly. remember that many passwords are case sensitive your caps lock might be on.
message notification.
do you want to save the image using this name anyway?
maximum undo memory.
shallow fog.
blending function for segment.
log out.
an analysis of the economic changes brought about by the planned development efforts in the past in presented below.
during the same period, the trade with overseas countries increased to 77.3 percent from 2.3 percent.
intermediate event  message.
allow grow.
zhengzhou.
scriptfu font selection.
karachi.
case changes only.
select a person from your address book to add this buddy to, or create a new person.
random by time since last play and rating.
africa/maseru.
unable to send message to.
kamchatka time.
wrap text.
the ten of clubs.
the philadelphia fed for instance reported that manufacturing activity  continues to decline  for the fourth month in a row.
all updates are complete.
from an advertising standpoint the problem is these offenders are likely to be some of the same folks that are major magazine advertisers these days.
proxy configuration mode.
always on visible workspace.
with adequate provisions of necessary agricultural support services, intensive farming will be introduced in areas with access to irrigation facilities.
restrict editing to polygons.
in such grave circumstances, the government has fully understood the need for institutionalization of the monitoring and evaluation systems with respect to development projects and programmes.
junction.
everyone has their own reasons for seeking wealth.
the bonds are rated single-a by s&p according to the lead underwriter.
move to bottom.
not enough free memory.
spreadsheet.
logical partition.
the company 's prepared statement quoted him as saying  the ceo succession is well along and i 've decided for personal reasons to take early retirement.
during the same period, 204 m. tons of medicinal herbs also is expected to have been processed.
cd quality, lossless.
but she did n't deserve to have her head chopped off.
random slur.
move an object.
not removing directory would remove home of user.
accessories.
error while savingcould not save image.
address list.
gnome prefix.
more advanced options.
â inefficient public enterprises the performance of state owned enterprises reached a stage of great inefficiency, indifference and apathy.
years ago he collaborated with the new music gurus peter serkin and fred sherry in the very counter-cultural chamber group tashi which won audiences over to dreaded contemporary scores like messiaen 's  quartet for the end of time.
multilayer switch with silicon.
the initial time.
entry action.
notes.
could not retrieve the user's profile. this most likely is a temporary serverside problem. please try again later.
columns.
discard text information.
key agreement cannot be started with yourself.
the biggest beneficiary was northeast bancorp which surged 7 3/4 to 69.
remove the red eye effect caused by camera flashes.
charities test the waters but they face legal barriers to electronic fund raising.
authentication failed.
has not been saved.
while many problems would attend a restructuring of columbia investors say mr. spiegel is mulling such a plan to mitigate columbia 's junk problems.
the location was disclosed as the u.s. began planning the issues to be discussed at the dec. 2-3 tete-a-tete.
the gtkadjustment that determines the values of the vertical position for this viewport.
restart.
package which provides is not configured yet.
controlled economic policed pursued by the panchayat regime in the past have given rise to distortions in the industrial structure as they promoted industrial and commercial activities which did not enhance any significant price value at the processing stage but were only profitable in the highly protected indian market.
undo steps.
enter the filename to load.
bcc.
the width used for each item.
america/miquelon.
sgi video.
catania.
no summary available.
curve bend.
the venture will be based in indianapolis.
expand all threads.
acceleration multiplier for mouse motion. a value of 1 is the system default.
corlu.
copy contacts to.
in consequence of the distorted ad hoc economic policies of thirty years interspersed with hollow slogans of disappointing development resumts and programmes without achievements, the country had to bear several economic distortions which were as follows.
user rooms.
but the automotive parts and aerospace concern expects that net for the year ending nov. 30 will exceed last fiscal year 's net of $ 70 million or $ 2.19 a share primarily because of $ 200 million in gains from sales of discontinued operations.
america/maceio.
the show runs the gamut from a blender to chairs to a model of the citicorp building.
pixels of blank space between wrapped lines in a paragraph.
scroll wheel zoom.
scream tracker audio.
free/busy.
set layer or path as active.
how far in screen pixels you need to be from the canvas edge to trigger autoscroll positive is outside the canvas, negative is within the canvas.
export all paths from this image.
transformation.
gulkana.
document.
watson lake.
favorite quote.
the name of the step.
darkroom.
could not connect data socket, connection timed out.
could not save the file.
the current opacity value 0 fully transparent, 65535 fully opaque.
present tooltips.
lucky lake.
this object doesn't support undo/redo. undo information erased.
no more layers above.
region selected for filter is empty.
calculation settings.
the three of spades.
new text node.
autoscrolling.
the communist party chief in moscow for talks with soviet officials also said east germany would follow gorbachev 's restructuring plans.
another major cause of accidents is the poor maintenance of vehicles.
transform gradients.
default mixer tracks.
default layer  channel preview size.
big board volume amounted to 154,240,000 shares down from 176.1 million tuesday.
livermore.
channel name.
assigned task.
interlace.
the policy and structural reforms to be adopted during the plan period do not permit any great reduction in the average rate of inflation.
job title.
in other years in which there have been moderate economic slowdowns the environment the firm expects in 1990 the change in dividends ranged from a gain of 4  to a decline of 1  according to painewebber analyst thomas doerflinger.
there is no image data in the clipboard to paste.
account editor.
omsk.
date digitized.
authentication failed.
documenters.
this will publish the keys in your key ring so they're available for others to use. you'll also get any changes others have made since you received their keys.
coptic.
loading.
type time.
whether to show menubar in new windows/tabs.
huehuetenango.
accelerator widget.
load options.
flagstaff.
enable syntax highlighting.
subject unique id.
unknown property.
enable sound server usage.
pgp keys.
west  northwest.
all of these forces came together in 1988 to benefit agriculture  mr. collins said.
he was previously vice president.
tours.
contents.
more serious friendships are formed when one enters puberty and achieves certain level of maturity.
antarctica/davis.
serial bonds are priced to yield from 6.20  in 1991 to 7  in 2000.
a file named already exists.
at least that 's the way it was reported.
but the ballplayers disagree.
file exists.
lock screen.
reading file listing.
select all.
the target of their wrath ?
industrial development and tourism promotion economic prosperity depends upon a rapid sustainable economic development.
set privacy for.
arviat.
blur / sharpen.
always enable arrows.
view or monitor system log files.
save debug log.
however, the public sector undertakings appeared to have received less bank credit disbursement in mid july 1991.
grid settings.
data store.
a host of electronics firms in california 's silicon valley were financed with trading-company venture capital.
there still persists the problem of maintaining the academic calendar, which has as adverse effect on studentsâ€™ future.
displace focus.
an additional rs 70 million was to be made available as loans to the private sector for investment in agriculture and industry.
tape array.
do not save.
flexible image transport system.
unknown type.
device not available.
intelligent scissors.
does not return.
do you really want to discard your changes?
toggle the display of dependency information.
type 1.
you will not be able to digest your late meal without a walk.
the required plugin was not found. please install this plugin and try again.
antonio novello whom mr. bush nominated to serve as surgeon general reportedly has assured the administration that she opposes abortion.
is this curve linear, spline interpolated, or freeform.
australian english.
santa rosa.
operation has been canceled.
-rrb- mr. stoltzman must have worried that his audience might not be able to take it : he warned us in advance that  new york counterpoint  lasts 11 1/2 minutes.
there was predominance of industrial goods in the total import in fy 1989/90.
select film color.
against this, 2,789,000 students attended classes by april 1990 and this works out to be 80 percent of that age group.
failed to remove.
we ate a nice hot dish of fish and prawns for lunch.
session management.
the long holidays will give them a chance to relax and recharge their batteries.
ecuador.
rotate counterclockwise.
port hardy.
authenticating.
expired.
the width of the empty border outside the containers children.
no more visited links.
24 port patch panel.
simple buffer.
replicate segment.
undo move.
on the back the shirts read  we have all the answers.
price situation : during the period 1989/90 and 19991/92, the urban consumer price index went up by 15.2 percent experiencing a growth prate of 16.8 percent in food and beverage products and 12.1 percent in non-food product and services.
riberalta.
pakistan 's bhutto defeated the first no-confidence motion in the nation 's 42-year history surviving the vote that could have brought down her 11-month-old government.
the report is subject to review by the state commission on judicial conduct which is empowered to impose sanctions.
a 50-state study released in september by friends for education an albuquerque n.m. school-research group concluded that  outright cheating by american educators  is  common.
inventories are closely watched for such clues for instance.
25th.
join selected endnodes with a new segment.
wynyard.
the graphics business which also was singled out by the chairman as a positive saw its operating earnings for the quarter jump 79  to $ 42.1 million from $ 23.5 million.
ndola.
config database backend failed.
the per capita food grain availability was diversely affected owing to the low growth rate in food grain supply in comparison to the growth rate in population.
whether to play sounds on user events.
japanese companies have long had a reputation for sacrificing short-term profits to make a sale that may have long-term benefits.
ran out of time while trying to find a solution.
conflicts with provided by.
condensator.
prevent the user from printing. for example, this would disable access to all applications' "print" dialogs.
not counting the extraordinary charge the company said it would have had a net loss of $ 3.1 million or seven cents a share.
the package cache file is corrupted.
these circumstances naturally call for political discipline, thrift and economic sacrifices.
magnatune information.
bonobo echo server factory.
guideline color.
whether tab will result in a tab character being entered.
priority.
when the sell programs hit you can hear the order printers start to go  on the big board trading floor says one specialist there.
enter the 6 digit number from the digital display.
file system backend.
verify public key.
work phone.
font size as a scale factor relative to the default font size. this properly adapts to theme changes etc. so is recommended. pango predefines some scales such as pangoscalexlarge.
both sides are jealously guarding their turf and relations have been at a flashpoint for months.
sort.
server address.
location of appointment.
simple printer.
cannot get server statistics.
chariton.
create.
recolor the image using colors from the active gradient.
disassemble a pile of tiles by removing matching pairs.
has returned from being idle.
major cash crops increased during the same period by 9.9 percent in production and 1.5 percent in area.
width, height.
place something on empty slot.
mr. van dover said the crystal changes his team introduced apparently pins the magnetic fields in place preventing them from lowering current-carrying capacity.
justification mode.
she gives the artist a sense of purpose but also alerts him to the serious inadequacy of his vagrant life.
geometric shapes.
extrude.
other phone.
set output separator character.
williams shares which were to be delisted from the new york stock exchange after the close of composite trading yesterday closed at $ 23.25 off 12.5 cents.
memory.
duplicate entry ' in ', ignoring.
visual effects.
switch to next tab.
coalesce.
right shift.
and south carolina says it is getting results.
menu item.
africa/nairobi.
archive manager.
the u.s. says it is anxious for results.
horizontal shift per column in  of tile width.
error getting book view.
to install packages.
font size set.
has invited to the chat room.
letlhakane.
filled concave.
the eighth plan is the first plan of the democratic government formed through popular elections following the restoration of democracy brought about by the historic people's ovement of 1990.
toolbars.
bournemouth.
they make a common culture,which is called nepali culture.
london interbank offered rates libor : 8 3/4  one month ; 8 3/4  three months ; 8 1/2  six months ; 8 7/16  one year.
braille patterns.
there were particularly there vita flaws in this methodology.
deleting failed.
japan is  very concerned  about the possible effects of program trading a senior japanese official said after the oct. 13 stock plunge in new york.
invalid opaque trace information.
flip text layer.
applications.
disable if two keys are pressed at the same time.
reduction of regional imbalances in nepal, poverty has acquired spatial variations.
warning no key specified for schema.
although the hammersmith and fulham council was by far the most active local authority engaging in such capital-markets transactions the court decision could set a precedent for similar transactions by 77 other local councils.
if you don't save, all your changes will be permanently lost.
click to edit the flowed text, drag to select part of the text.
it is estimated that a tota1 of 598,804 ha of land will have received irrigation facility by t he end of fy 1991/1 92.fu11 detail are given in table 1.
info options.
it has also become important to entrust full responsibility of the operation and management of irrigation systems to user farmers after soliciting their organised participation in the identification, feasibility studies, selection and implementation of irrigation systems.
buddy name.
line  missing new password.
europe/sarajevo.
haddock directive.
realtime preview.
private construction spending was down but government building activity was up.
double click time.
upgrade canceled.
drag and drop colors to rearrange the colormap. the numbers shown are the original indices. rightclick for a menu with sort options.
mr. ridley hinted at this motive in answering questions from members of parliament after his announcement.
i am the youngest in a family of six children.
opacity of the selection box.
program traders are fond of predicting that if they are blocked in the u.s. they will simply emigrate to foreign stock markets.
luminosity threshold.
move a card to an empty temporary slot.
man can preserve his thoughts and ideas through writing.
you are creating a new room. would you like to configure it, or accept the default settings?
video movement detector.
inland, and on flat territory, rain holds the soil together.
tambacounda.
error importing selected file.
desktop.
wrap mode for multiline text.
window buttons are visible.
could not read header from.
la rochesuryon.
he must come to their rescuer in time of need.
an error occurred.
tokyo stocks edged up wednesday in relatively active but unfocused trading.
the company plugged itself right into carter campaign rhetoric about rebuilding the south bronx and kept using the minority south bronx angle through the reagan '80s.
delta junction.
default new image.
in both cases nec lost the contract to fujitsu which made the same bid and won a tie-breaking lottery.
move to front.
the rehabilitation of the environment in terms of the magnitude of degradation that has occurred has become a momentous task for a century.
the first amendment proscribes the government from passing laws abridging the right to free speech  judge donald o'brien ruled.
sets whether to enable restoring of remote locations.
specific business application.
importer type.
nordholz.
search in current layer.
move folder to.
reset menu.
power off.
levels.
state/province.
sleeping.
unknown symptom.
internal procedures.
troff me input document.
do you want to include selected system snippets in your export?
add group.
mosjøen.
use average value.
gimpressionist.
make image sharper less powerful than unsharp mask.
burbank.
guaratinguetá.
mail delivery via the sendmail program.
the passwords don't match, please double check and try entering them again.
whether the current value is displayed as a string next to the slider.
internet.
remote server timeout.
central african republic.
bumpmap.
chinese traditional.
destination folder.
some of the surge in the stock 's price appeared to be linked to revived takeover speculation which has contributed to volatility of campbell shares in recent months.
atlantic city.
czechoslovakia said in may it could seek $ 2 billion from hungary if the twindam contract were broken.
the ace of spades.
move selected objects.
the stamford conn. concern has agreed to a buy-out by bank of new york in a transaction with an indicated value of about $ 100 a share that expires next august.
's password.
request obsoletes service's data.
playlists cannot be added to video or audio discs.
pink.
i am a kathmandu native and many generations of my family have lived here.
unrecognized identified coding system.
lightness.
update package list.
blend settings.
out of this requirement, 21 percent only is expected to be met through the production of bhrikuti paper factory and everest paper mills.
as a result fed officials may be divided over whether to ease credit.
what else can a small investor do ?
unable to stat.
portable players.
u.s. farmers ' net income rose to a record $ 59.9 billion last year despite one of the worst droughts ever.
but with the index proving somewhat better than expected and the widely anticipated report on october employment scheduled to arrive tomorrow stock prices firmed only modestly in response to the report and then faltered.
you cannot specify both an archive and a version for a package.
minimize all.
shingle point.
adventurers are provided with world-class services by rafting agents.
unformatted.
gallup.
deinterlace.
next character.
now nations fight to get monopoly over the trade and commerce of a particular country.
whether the widget responds to input.
decompose to layers.
stop process.
logo background color set.
data center switch.
regular expression compilation failed.
research must be given the green light.
information has the power to change culture customs and communities.
he said usx also appeared to sell a richer mix of steel products such as the more profitable pipe and galvanized coated sheet than lower-priced structural goods.
is expander.
encouraged by mrs. ward mrs. yeargin taught honor students in the state  teacher cadet  program a reform creation designed to encourage good students to consider teaching as a career.
union.
disable saving files to disk.
delete selected nodes.
shift vertically.
now let's tackle your shopping spree.
get a specific element from a list key, numerically indexed.
yacuiba.
similarly, with the objective of achieving full convertibility if the nepalese currency in current account, a partial convertibility system was introduced.
left.
assistant phone.
secondly, as this methodology fixes the investment requirement based in incremental capital output ration with total disregard to economy in sectoral allocations and better result-oriented standards, it can not be utilized in the evaluation of alternative resource allocations and in the analysis of the effects of alternative investment plan on production, employment and other variables as a whole.
automatically synchronize remote mail locally.
preview may be out of date.
select the next event arriving from the controller.
saint joseph.
sheboygan.
a list of style attributes to apply to the text of the renderer.
but the new york stock exchange chairman said he does n't support reinstating a  collar  on program trading arguing that firms could get around such a limit.
predepends on.
error renaming file to.
attribute repeated twice on the same element.
mailing list.
mobile access router.
save  use.
save attachment.
brownwood.
during these years also, foreign grants and loans played a major role in maintaining a favourable balance of payments situation.
drag to resize the flowed text frame.
it would also have a beautiful garden and a barbecue area for garden parties.
simplest, most commonly used way of blurring.
indent node.
in the 1988 period usx also had a $ 71 million after-tax gain from a tax dispute settlement.
people's savings financial corp. said it will buy back as much as 10  of its 2.4 million shares outstanding because the stock is undervalued.
create a new image when applying filter.
the productivity, thus decreased by a rate of 0.1 percent.
failed to restart.
goes right one cell.
flow excluded region.
merge palette.
side right.
dow will own 60  of the venture with eli lilly holding the rest.
but rep. marge roukema r. n.j instead praised the house 's acceptance of a new youth  training  wage a subminimum that gop administrations have sought for many years.
end time.
horizontal adjustment for the text widget.
default spacing.
the government policy instead of being incentive oriented was control oriented to attract the foreign investment.
the side car routes program trades into a special computer file that scans for imbalances of buy and sell orders.
enable accessibility.
add stop.
compared to the overwhelming expectations and the needs of the people, the achievements are still quite insignificant.
c) similarly, the data of national income projections in nepal are available only from the year 1964/65.
australia/lordhowe.
mnemonic key.
desktop home icon name.
besides the direct physical destruction, wetlands are also threatened by chemical contamination and other pollutants.
gas holder, basic.
find backdrop.
moody 's said the average net asset value of 24 junk-bond mutual funds fell by 4.2  in october.
amount of border space between the toolbar shadow and the buttons.
remove empty borders from the image.
today taxpayers get to vote most of the time on whether they want to finance the building schemes of our modern political pharaohs or let private money erect these playgrounds for public passions.
ortonville.
linear gradient fill.
syloti nagri.
change password for.
at the same time viacom is trying to persuade stations to make commitments to  a different world  a spin-off of  cosby  whose reruns will become available in 1991.
uberlândia.
esso said the fields were developed after the australian government decided in 1987 to make the first 30 million barrels from new fields free of excise tax.
whether a palette should be used.
musoma.
package ' does not contain any files !
instant messaging.
resolution.
left angle.
full screen.
the avon conn. company 's stock hit a high in 1983 after it unveiled its adam home computer but the product was plagued with glitches and the company 's fortunes plunged.
/sort objects/by name.
couldn't sign key.
if set, the label is used to pick a stock item instead of being displayed.
but most said the index had no more than a minimal effect on trade.
the sun raster image format.
moving messages.
keep icons lined up on a grid.
next 7 days' tasks.
kramfors.
attachment properties.
subscribe or unsubscribe to folders on remote servers.
cannot attach cms data.
i was somewhat reluctant to join him the second time.
death.
future is always uncertain.
activates default.
in september union planters corp. of memphis tenn. launched the edge account a package designed for the  thirtysomething  crowd with services that include a credit card and line of credit with no annual fees and a full percentage point off on installment loans.
full name.
cannot ban  banlist is full.
north east england.
an error occurred while opening the file.
announce cell header.
when convenient.
invalid header in icon.
use only local spam tests.
misspelled word.
thousands of innocent lives were lost in these tragedies.
affected range.
adds a shadow effect to each brush stroke.
this option will connect to the server using an anonymous login.
if the revenue grows at this rate, the total revenue will reach 10.2 percent at current prices and 6.2 percent at constant prices of the gross domestic product.
twenty four hour time format.
whether or not to give the color an alpha value.
enlarge the document.
icon details.
my stocks are all blue chips  she says.
a $ 114 million issue of health facility revenue bonds from the california health facilities financing authority was temporarily withdrawn after being tentatively priced by a first boston corp. group.
worst.
"fix seed" button is an alias of me. the same seed produces the same image, if 1 the widths of images are same this is the reason why image on drawable is different from preview, and 2 all mutation rates equal to zero.
sumburgh.
speed of marching ants in the selection outline. this value is in milliseconds less time indicates faster marching.
it is said that there is seldom a month when newari festival does not take place.
storing folder.
integrate.
sri lanka.
image size has changed.
crop the selected page.
carcassonne.
speak cell.
width in chars.
santarém.
i began jogging when i was twelve years old.
random by rating.
type.
out of this figure, it was in 1990/91 alone that the drinking water facility was provided to 482,899 people.
killustrator document.
this is most probably due o the fact that to be productive in one's work, one has to believe in team work.
channel mixer.
copy.
mr. stoltzman introduced his colleagues : bill douglas pianist/bassoonist/composer and an old buddy from yale and jazz bassist eddie gomez.
the type of operation that the file selector is performing.
passphrase.
in this perspective, the goals and objectives defined in the eighth plan will be considered as indicative and as guidelines, the fulfillment of which requires the participation and support of all sections of the nation together with the capabilities of the state.
canvas.
bathurst.
negotiable bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order.
display the file roller manual.
after these payments about $ 225,000 will be available for the 20 million common shares outstanding.
add a new entry.
collection for chemical engineering.
about.
restarting evolution.
default charset in which to display messages.
start time is wrong.
whether to ask for confirmation when closing a terminal window which has more than one open tab.
iso image.
fill type.
there was an error subscribing to notification of audio profile list changes.
then wednesday fujitsu said it made a similar bid to win a library contract in nagano prefecture two weeks earlier.
volunteering also exposes one to many interesting ideas and issues.
i 'm very alarmed to see these rich valuations  says smith barney 's mr. porter.
the other countries provide them with enough incentives and facilities.
if possible, apply transformation to objects without adding a transform attribute.
convolve type.
attorneys in the third stock-manipulation trial of gaf corp. began opening arguments yesterday in the manhattan courtroom of u.s. district judge mary johnson lowe.
available images.
anapa.
play a sound for new conversations.
wireless transport.
unable to get builddependency information for.
service fracturing co. proposed offering of 1.2 million shares of common stock via lovett mitchell webb & garrison inc. and blunt ellis & loewi inc.
select objects to convert to path.
no grouping.
north carolina.
totem could not display the help contents.
a time relative to the current time.
the senate finance committee chaired by a fellow texan democratic sen. lloyd bentsen last month urged u.s. trade representative carla hills to use mr. pickens 's experience in talks with tokyo  to highlight this problem facing americans who seek access to the japanese capital markets.
send files….
in the irrigation sector, too, only 550,467 hectares of land had access to irrigation facility by 1989/90which comprised only 21 percent of the total land under cultivation.
welcome to tinyscheme.
two leading constitutional-law experts said president bush does n't have the legal authority to exercise a line-item veto.
structure of the organisation.
america/tortola.
memory maps.
solar energy.
argentine negotiator carlos carballo was in washington and new york this week to meet with banks.
asia/irkutsk.
save fractal parameters.
evansville.
syktyvkar.
base on.
on the new york mercantile exchange heating oil for december delivery increased 1.25 cents to settle at 60.36 cents a gallon.
directly install mozilla firefox.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 5.
warning failed to parse float value '.
fergus falls.
strong dividend growth he says is  the black widow of valuation  a reference to the female spiders that attract males and then kill them after mating.
percent complete.
deal a new card.
create circle.
could not save the archive.
the field has reserves of 21 million barrels.
rj45 wallplug.
deleted.
you can learn to be bold, assertive, independent as well express your opinions and gain communication and interpersonal skills.
randomization.
taking point value of nonpoint node.
wichita falls.
i am not blaming the migrants.
package which provides is to be removed.
save background color.
abort.
running.
whether the statusbar has a grip for resizing the toplevel.
replyto.
device.
at constant prices the figures thus stood at 1.8 percent and 1.7 percent respectively.
number of pixels the cursor can move before dragging.
move to the next solution.
pacific/tahiti.
relay characteristic sigma.
unknown command.
under the present circumstances, the moneysupply should be maintained within desirable limits without causing any undur scarcity of capital to intensify the pace of economic development.
drawing grid.
on the one hand brazil started an ethanol program about 15 years ago to fuel a huge portion of its national fleet of cars and is now committed to this program.
imports were at $ 50.38 billion up 19.
insufficient memory to save image to callback.
downgrade.
list workspaces of the screen output format "number workspace name".
degrees.
cell phone.
shared clean.
file is corrupt. line option section incorrect.
the ultimate result came in hymowitz v. lilly where the highest new york court expanded the market-share approach for the first time to say that drug makers that could prove mindy hymowitz 's mother did n't use their pill must still pay their share of any damages.
among them, the koshi is the largest, the narayani is the deepest and the karnali is the longest rivers in nepal.
composer preferences.
wink.
but they have obtained 8300 forms without court permission and used the information to help develop criminal cases.
a year earlier net income was $ 2.1 million or six cents a share on revenue of $ 169.9 million.
huesaturation.
this adversely affected the environment as well as the climate of the country.
if you choose to delete the feed and files, they will be permanently lost. please note that you can delete the feed but keep the downloaded files by choosing to delete the feed only.
key servers.
mr. black said he is  pleased  with the economy 's recent performance and does n't see  a lot of excesses out there that would tilt us into recession.
select next vector.
brown gold.
the man asked me to go along with them so that i could help make the police report.
apply.
its net income for the september quarter rose about 41  from a year ago.
user.
for this purpose, the budgetary allocation of funds for rural development will be increased to seventy percent of the total development budget outlay.
america/cambridgebay.
posting to this mailing list is not allowed. possibly, this is a readonly mailing list. contact the list owner for details.
the artist has his routine.
invariably those strong periods in the economy give way to recessionary environments  he says.
why are programs like this not eliminated ?
flowchart.
abstract classname.
yaounde.
quick mask attributes.
speech enabled.
the following error occurred while importing.
in a development system that encompasses the majority of the population, a greater numger of producers including the marginal ones can have access to the increased rural income.
set user info.
chamberlain.
nekoosa has given the offer a public cold shoulder a reaction mr. hahn has n't faced in his 18 earlier acquisitions all of which were negotiated behind the scenes.
updating available packages info, using.
the company forecast that fourth-quarter income from continuing operations would be  significantly  lower than a year earlier.
invalid response. please enter an integer between 1 and.
uncompressed size.
motion blur.
nepalâ€™s vast potential to generate comparatively cheap hydropower provides comparative advantages in many energy through modern technology and its integration with the development of other sectors of the economy can enhance sectoral productivity as well as comparative advantages.
playlist is an automatic playlist.
email address must be in a proper format.
search for keys on a key server.
foreground color of the title.
the antialiasing mode of the canvas.
if true, users can resize the window.
during the period of 1961/62 and 1989/90, while the are3a covered by the cereal crops increased at the rate of 2.2 percent per annum, production of principal cereal crops increased at an average of 2.1 percent per annum.
process view columns order.
can redo.
asia/vientiane.
statistics.
cyrillic/ukrainian.
polyline.
whether spacers are vertical lines or just blank.
rotate.
this challenge has been further compounded by the degradation of natural resources and environment.
disconnect.
no linear gradients found in.
data line width.
current account.
use cyclic range.
the method driver could not be found.
options.
memo information sent.
forest determination took place intensively during this period.
delete file.
gimp document.
history.
this phenomenon corroborates the fact that the economy is increasingly becoming dependent on loans and the flow if financial resources channeled directly towards economic and social services for development is very much limited.
if you're ever lost and alone in the woods, hug a tree.
passwd.
the bonobo activation configuration file was not read successfully. please, check it is valid in.
scattering.
failed to save data.
treat as this.
plugin can't handle layers.
package is a virtual package provided by.
text of the label widget inside the button, if the button contains a label widget.
sorry, profiles marked as containing adult content are not supported at this time.
we are all citizens of one country or the other.
the factory pointer.
viterbo.
i think we 've got enough securities laws  he says.
under the so-called team taurus approach mr. veraldi and other ford product planners sought the involvement of parts suppliers assembly-line workers auto designers and financial staff members from the initial stages of the development cycle.
use of scoring high is widespread in south carolina and common in greenville county mrs. yeargin 's school district.
an error occurred while loading the archive.
subsequent to the formation of the interim government, an understanding with india in may 1990 ended the trade impasse with india which had begun on march 23, 1989, reinstating the status quo ante in relationship with india.
legislating new trading inefficiencies will only make things harder on the least sophisticated investors.
documents with unsaved changes.
mildenhall.
farmers destroyed sofa, broke tables and chairs and shattered windowpanes.
white-haired pedro ramos at 54 the league's oldest player and a pitcher-coach with the suns has lost even more speed.
lompoc.
copy the selection.
allow rules.
plain text document.
unlimited requests.
move.
this is the real issue raised by the wedtech scandal.
these trends continue to exist even today.
unable to locate theme engine in modulepath ,.
sharedata develops and markets low-cost software peripheral equipment and accessories for computers.
function.
browser views.
mark as seen after specified timeout.
start arrow.
the share of the manufacturing sector including cottage industries stood at about 5 percent of gdp and provided employment to only about 2 percent of the total labour force.
right padding.
as the success of the centralization programme depends to a large extent on the abilities and attitudes of the local level employees, arrangements will be made for upgrading their work- performance through training and career development opportunities.
the estimated growth rate of the eighth plan con not be considered unduly high in comparison with the high growth rates achieved by developing nations through economic liberalization.
argentina.
pdf documents.
safe.
bavaria.
mr. riese says american express considers gm and buick  very sophisticated direct-mail marketers  so  by joining forces with them we have managed to maximize our direct-mail capability.
chickasha.
the king of hearts.
this led to arbitrary estimates of resources likely to be available in the plan period.
adjust color curves.
show or hide guides.
mask value.
operation stopped.
oklahoma.
edit appointment.
peter anthony who runs an employment agency in new york decries program trading as  limiting the game to a few  but he also is n't sure it should be more strictly regulated.
lower selection to bottom.
thuringia.
the soviet union bought roughly 310 million bushels of u.s. corn in october which is the most ever sold to the soviet union in one month from the u.s.
pulsate progress bar.
smile!
makefile.
passphrase.
overdue tasks.
slideshow.
calculate first derivative numerically.
archive.
file name.
email address.
display as.
it 's probably worth paying a premium for funds that invest in markets that are partially closed to foreign investors such as south korea some specialists say.
who 's really lying ?  asks a female voice.
def. value.
select action for event.
export.
sensing that something was wrong, he quickly threw on his t-shirt and slipped into a pair of jeans.
fit.
system configuration and monitoring.
vienna.
sign message with key.
read.
enlisting panchayat as a third sector in the periodic plans of the panchayat regime, statistical projections were made with regard to people's labours contribution.
20th.
create geometric shapes.
translators.
barre.
minimum password age.
copper : futures prices rose extending tuesday 's gains.
yakutsk.
andover.
attached.
event with no end date.
title.
sturgeon bay.
linear gradient start.
no image data type specified.
smart home end.
message could not be sent because a connection error occurred.
i could sure use a backrub right about now.
bow island.
odd character expected a  or '/' character to end the start tag of element or optionally an attribute perhaps you used an invalid character in an attribute name.
supportive callers decried unfair testing not mrs. yeargin on a local radio talk show on which she appeared.
for the attainment of equitable economic development, it is necessary to accelerate demands for labour and to expedite food supply.
light 3.
driver.
its budget $ 184 million is paid for by you.
and it was stupid.
percentage.
would you like to send this task to participants?
width of the horizontal border of tab labels.
net is expected to rise to 17 billion yen from 12.82 billion yen a year earlier.
these factors limited, to a certain extent, the activities if the private sector.
could not make directory '.
while it implies that rapid industrial growth is not possible without tackling the energy constraints, the growth of agricultural production may be impeded by the lack of energy for life-irrigation and processing of agricultural products.
seconds arrow line width.
panama city.
lizard.
paste width.
packages to be upgraded these packages will be upgraded to a newer version.
threshold.
save all open files.
adaptive supersampling.
multiple messages.
channel representations.
retail sales also were reported slow in most districts particularly  for discretionary big-ticket items such as furniture home appliances and consumer electronics.
michael basham deputy assistant secretary for federal finance said the treasury may wait until late monday or even early tuesday to announce whether the autions are to be rescheduled.
autodelete sent item.
height pixels.
your selected account name was rejected by the server. it probably contains invalid characters.
smokers are at a higher risk of developing certain kinds of cancers because cigarette smoke contains carcinogens.
america/asuncion.
torrance.
specify session management id.
the title of the file chooser dialog.
the rate of productivity went up by 7.9 percent.
the communication sector was in fact stagnated as the media of communication were within the government control.
cover the area you want to select as the foreground.
during this period, regular expenditure will, according to the estimate, grow by 20.1 percent at current prices and 4.3 percent at constant prices.
lord chilver 63-year-old chairman of english china clays plc was named a nonexecutive director of this british chemical company.
pause playback if currently playing.
untitled document.
the securities to be sold next week will raise about $ 10 billion in cash and redeem $ 20 billion in maturing notes.
unrecognized attribute name.
cipher machine.
font description.
push button.
workgroup 5500.
moves flat review to the next character.
move selected messages to another folder.
save in folder.
font family set.
possible candidates include susan petersen president of ballantine/del rey/fawcett random house 's huge and successful paperback division.
show type field in the event/task/meeting editor.
failed to delete.
herbert m. baum the 53-year-old president of the company 's campbell u.s.a. unit and edwin l. harper 47 the chief financial officer will run campbell as a team dividing responsibilities rather evenly until a successor is named.
unknown paper size ', using default.
save selected.
an unsupported storage action was attempted.
zeltweg.
stampede package.
a file named already exists. do you want to replace it with the one you are saving?
description contains.
layer,layer,.
monitoring and evaluation while the planned projects are not usually implemented on time, the project subsequent to their implementation, too, have failed to produce the desired result.
attendee status can not be updated because the item no longer exists.
select file to open.
open a new window with the same document.
members have a lot to gain in terms of cheaper and quality goods and services.
user interface events.
icon set.
failed to remove.
carrier routing system.
one can opt for day of river running or more.
eveleth.
william randolph hearst had kept an apartment in the spanish renaissance-style building.
the national association of securities dealers the self-regulatory organization for the over-the-counter securities markets disciplined a number of firms and individuals for alleged violations of industry rules.
toggle state.
fatal parse error in gradient file  corrupt segment in line.
config file is empty.
category.
developer's help program.
and sales of test-coaching booklets for classroom instruction are booming.
mark the selected messages as having been read.
coupledmaplattice explorer.
playback volume is.
people close to the gm-jaguar talks agreed that ford now may be able to shut out general motors.
size of the brush used for refinements.
he and his successor mary anne dolan restored respect for the editorial product and though in recent years the paper had been limping along on limited resources its accomplishments were notable.
or errors caused by missing dependencies. this is ok, only the errors.
select today.
can only save drawables!
send a ping to a network address.
filename.
couldn't start playback.
set your mobile phone number.
guides.
samoa.
removing shortcut failed.
all right, you win.
remove the filter from the package list.
minimum slider length.
dd acquisition said 2.2 million shares or about 38.5  of the shares outstanding have been tendered under its offer.
change grid foreground color.
resume playback if currently paused.
draw indicator.
view all files.
pittsburgh.
no password supplied.
variation selectors.
line style should not appear.
hence, the school-student ration of 1961 increased from 1:172 to 1:187 by april 1990 and similarly, the teacher-student ration changed from 1:15 to 1:35.
woman gold.
ciudad juárez.
further acceleration in industrial production is expected as a result of the new industrial policy.
farmingdale.
the gtkactiongroup this gtkaction is associated with, or null for internal use.
this objective and the concept of equity are complementary to each other.
gällivare.
edit palette color.
segmentation violation.
thought the history if foreign trade of nepal is long, the date relating to balance of payment being available only after 1974/75, the situation analysis is possible only of the years thereafter.
pucallpa.
ed macheski a wilton conn. money manager who follows bank stocks said the announcement effectively gives the deal  the green light.
password inactive.
decision.
central european.
pixels from top.
merging available information.
apply threshold.
clickdrag to move a copy of the selected pixels.
saturation.
supercomputer.
lock and key.
younkers management is likely to buy a 10  to 20  interest in the chain in january said fred s. hubbell equitable 's president and chief executive officer.
education.
select file to import.
the increased demand in the labour force during the eighth plan period is expected to reach over 1.4 million jobs.
precisely control objects' transformations.
the following files could not be imported.
osha cited nearly 1,500 alleged violations of federal electrical crane-safety record-keeping and other requirements.
error while parsing stylesheet.
searches for the previous instance of a string.
shortcut does not exist.
person enters chat.
show area handles.
create a backup copy of files before saving.
the warrants expire nov. 30 1990.
the new zealand bond issue simply has brought the two institutions face-to-face.
curved eight point star.
west texas intermediate crude for december delivery rose 13 cents a barrel to settle at $ 20.07.
spool folders cannot be deleted.
deficit finance: thus, the mobilistation of deficit finance became an important tool of resource mobilistation due to the decline in the revenue surplus and the lack of optimum utilization of foreign aid.
communications, rural industries and tourism etc. providing the basic facilities of life such as suspension bridges, schools and health care, the environment in the villages will be made comfortably in the rural areas.
ar archive.
definition in english.
ssl certificate authority.
optional email address.
pixels inside wrap.
cylinder length.
enable debug output.
magnitude map.
i 'm doing the main story and i 'm already two beers drunk  said reporter andy furillo whom the times hired away several years ago but who returned to the herald out of preference.
email address.
the index of the 100 largest nasdaq financial stocks rose modestly as well gaining 1.28 to 449.04.
keyboard.
brightness/contrast tool adjust brightness and contrast.
he is his own man.
according to these new rules, project chiefs are authorized to senction estimated expenditures if upto 5 million rupees, to approve tenders of upto 20 million rupees and to modify upto 10 percent of total expenditure on technical grounds.
refresh scripts.
the december contract rose 1.20 cents a pound to $ 1.14.
bucket size.
as regards the trade structure of import, the shares of foods and raw materials, industrial goods and other materials in the total import in fy 1961/62 were 39.9 percent, 59.5 percent and 0.8 percent respectively.
double click any card to redeal.
more refined one was utilized in air transport.
cut the selected text to the clipboard.
document font.
closing diagram without saving.
pixelizing.
case insensitive matching.
genetics institute inc. cambridge mass. said it was awarded u.s. patents for interleukin-3 and bone morphogenetic protein.
invert the case of selected text.
pointenoire.
windows metafile graphics.
in this perspective, the goals and objectives defined in the eighth plan will be considered as indicative and as guidelines, the fulfillment of which requires the participation and support of all sections of the nation together with the capabilities of the state.
considering the development of institutional infrastructures during the past period and also the priority accorded in the allocation of development expenditure to meet theabove objective, the achievements made in the agricultural sector in respect of pro duction and productivity appeared to be far from satisfactory.
sobel edge detection.
icon.
convert the image into irregular tiles.
select game.
all items below are optional. enter only the information with which you feel comfortable.
these allocations are commensurate to with the priorities established in the original plan.
america/managua.
the pathname is not an absolute path.
calendar selection.
how to connect to esd.
raise selected object.
is already installed at the requested version.
failed to read data from child process.
when you do that there is not a cut but there is in fact a program increase of $ 5 million  each for the ftc and the justice department rep. neal smith d. iowa said during house debate.
tashkent.
calgary.
not a maildir directory.
anniversary.
middle mouse button.
process.
that is not a valid name, try again.
stroke width.
edit object.
not connected.
failed to read the override file.
dodoma.
current languages.
group  no user.
in a materialistic world, money is an indispensable commodity which everyone, young or old, man or woman, seeks.
outset selected paths.
klamath falls.
as nepali congress in committed to democratic socialism, the principal objective of the economic policy will be the amelioration of the standard of living of the deprived citizens through democratic processes.
outside type.
horizontal.
words must be supplemented by visual aids which are important.
the table of options for popt.
on the assumption that the rate of population growth will be 2.1 percent during the plan period, the above economic growth rate will result in a three -fold increase over previous per-capita growth rates or a three percent annual growth in per capital income.
name used to refer to the text tag. null for anonymous tags.
in a statement jaguar 's board said they  were not consulted about the -lrb- ridley decision -rrb- in advance and were surprised at the action taken.
could not parse recipient list.
the constitution does not expressly give the president such power.
display window buttons with text only.
use sinefunction for this color component.
package.
he also unfortunately illustrated this intricate jazzy tapestry with mr. pearson's images this time of geometric or repeating objects in a kitschy mirroring of the musical structure that was thoroughly distracting from mr. reich 's piece and mr. stoltzman 's elegant execution of it.
the original author of dia was.
floating selection.
recover.
enter the recipients of the message.
layer size.
address.
when enabled, menus can be torn off.
must specify a key pattern to search for.
this operation will permanently erase all tasks marked as completed. if you continue, you will not be able to recover these tasks. really erase these tasks?
mr. m'bow was an extreme case but even his replacement the more personally genial spanish biochemist federico mayor has had little success at achieving reforms.
create a new address book.
web page.
key agreement request.
the battery plant which makes rechargeable nickel cadmium and carbon zinc products will be closed over the next year or so a spokesman said.
nonprintable character.
lyneham.
current locale.
mail deletion failed.
lower hour in the time popup selector.
institutional investors mostly remained on the sidelines tuesday.
the distance from the center of the image determines the size of the stroke.
encryption type.
hold the putty ! with lipsticks liners lotions and creams there are still beauty plans left 0 to tackle : but as the years go by it seems that before i paint i should spackle.
error.
statistic is of immense use in planning, business, economics, administration etc.
paste.
flowchart objects.
select at least 2 paths to perform a boolean operation.
undo last operation.
buddy list.
crop layer.
set step size.
then.
it said it needs to make the payment by dec. 1 to avoid a default that could lead to an acceleration of the debt.
the default terminal application to use for applications that require a terminal.
if true, the window has no mimimum size. setting this to true is 99 of the time a bad idea.
24th.
close all.
set the format for the returned date.
associative.
unmatched.
master system or game gear rom.
invalid argument for valid values are.
djanet.
according to audit bureau of circulations time the largest newsweekly had average circulation of 4,393,237 a decrease of 7.3.
this accelerator is already bound to.
invalid argument value.
the utilized amount appears to have exceeded the aid commitments because of the inclusion of unused amount of previous years.
chats.
nice value.
new calendar.
all instances.
view new folders using.
pencil.
empty.
mr. martin said they have n't yet decided what their next move would be but he did n't rule out the possibility of a consent solicitation aimed at replacing georgia gulf 's board.
whether this tag affects underlining.
most in demand : classic photographs by masters such as stieglitz and man ray.
title foreground.
open each selected item in a navigation window.
click in any image to pick the background color.
that has been particularly true this year with many companies raising their payouts more than 10.
modify saturation channel.
already in opposite list.
pending does not take any nonoption arguments.
diaobject.
every decision leads to some consequences.
goes to previous unvisited link.
that settlement was in april 1987.
priority will be given to the installation of shallow tubewells in areas where shallow aquifers exist.
these materials including macmillan/mcgraw-hill school publishing co. 's scoring high and learning materials are nothing short of sophisticated crib sheets according to some recent academic research.
shuffle mode.
show arrow.
click to move.
under the state 's education improvement act low test scores can block students ' promotions or force entire districts into wrenching state-supervised  interventions  that can mean firings.
connecticut.
edit current matrix.
open another nautilus window for the displayed location.
devices  network tools.
security area.
vicksburg.
disable autosnap.
punctuation, final quote.
we shall no longer be talking to our insurance agents for our claims.
orthogonal polyline flow.
voiceenabled access server.
tab width.
cubistic transformation.
unmaximize vertically.
upper threshold.
rendering blast.
print header.
offset of text above the baseline below the baseline if rise is negative in pango units.
number of revolutions.
switch to clockwise.
layer 2 remote switch.
the expansion of the public sector and the uncontrolled inclusion of numerous projects during the panchayat regime have led to the continuity of an expenditure burden in the initial years of the eighth plan entailing a continued increase in government expenditure and negative savings.
unassigned type.
unmaximize the window.
incorrect encoding in authorization.
artist  album.
while the production of jute goods decreased at an average of 6 percent per annum during the period, the production of agricultural tools and bricks and tiles decreased at 4.1 and 1.8 percent respectively.
caen.
unknown compression algorithm.
cancelled.
show connection points.
a s the returns from investment take long time to materialize, the policy reforms and the structural changes in the eighth plan are confidently expected to increase the work-performance of the economy particularly in the later years of the plan and thereafter.
failed to move temporary file to final location.
fractal type.
flip selected objects horizontally.
do you want to add this file to the current archive or open it as a new archive?
character encoding.
cool link 1.
click to connect this anchor with the selected endpoint.
the purhasing managers ' report also added evidence that inflation is under control.
capabilities.
python.
half wave rectifier or ramp input.
couldn't add subkey.
private.
by size.
show menubar.
critical.
call.
try rearranging the cards.
friendly and fruitful contacts with foreign countries can also be established.
luxor.
water moves slowly and this prevents flooding.
the sec 's mr. lane vehemently disputed those estimates.
show question options.
penza.
children love their father too but whenever they have any problem, they go to their mother for help.
couldn't parse layout no column format specified for static item.
evolution integration.
substantial foreign exchange was earned from the tourist sector during the period from 1961/62 to 1989/90.
generic building blue.
with so many structured activities, some children have no time to choose their own leisure pursuits.
paper size.
show hidden and backup files.
newton.
thus, the share of industrial sector in total investment will rise to an average of 8.8 percent in the eighth plan from the 7.7 percent average of the seventh plan.
multiple instance collapsed subprocess.
no value set.
forbidden upgrade.
console beep.
space which is inserted between cells.
moves flat review to the previous character.
number of mines.
he says he had candlestick built because the giants claimed 0 they needed 10,000 parking spaces.
active.
but he isn't worried.
fix images where every other row is missing.
file under.
switch to "from seed" with the last seed.
contents.
generic item moniker.
web folder.
is used to notify that the table summary has changed.
must specify some schema files to install.
currently the government charges nothing for such filings.
horizontally aligned arrow.
doublepipe exchanger.
thus it becomes far more highly developed than in humans, since survival may depend on it.
the printer “” is low on paper.
you are already running the script.
has been invited to this conversation.
about aisleriot.
these unpleasant impacts are collectively called as noise pollution.
interactive refinement.
the dollar posted gains against all major currencies yesterday buoyed by persistent japanese demand for u.s. bond issues.
writable memory.
ibm the giant computer maker offered $ 750 million of non-callable 30-year debentures priced to yield 8.47  or about 1/2 percentage point higher than the yield on 30-year treasury bonds.
connecting to.
diskette.
failed to create file.
remove this photo from this key.
automatically detected.
paste the text stored on the clipboard.
america/catamarca.
unknown interface.
the name of the widget.
several candidates have withdrawn their names from consideration after administration officials asked them for their views on abortion and fetal-tissue transplants.
firstly, there was a gradual increase in the share of foreign assistance in the development expenditure.
optional participants.
specifies how the area around the image should be drawn.
delete file.
smtp server.
the futures industry is regulated by the commodity futures trading commission which reports to the agriculture committees in both houses.
for their troubles the banks get a larger captive audience that is less likely to move at the drop of a rate.
block all users.
the fire is also fueled by growing international interest in japanese behavior.
neuchâtel.
says long-time associate jerry griffin vice president corporate development at wtd industries inc. :  he is n't of the old school of winning at any cost.
illegal instruction.
did not understand trailing characters in string.
failed to access configuration sources.
bowman.
show gameplay statistics.
unable to cut or copy because the selected region is empty.
open diagram.
icon theme name.
time zone.
warning message.
the number of workspaces deprecated.
visualization.
folder name.
it was full of violence and gangs and kids cutting class  says linda ward the school 's principal.
table.
pelotas.
political decisions were often autocratic and feudalistic.
the loudest of these reformers are money managers who cater to smaller investors.
the people of every country should benefit by modern inventions.
ponta delgada.
blur method.
shape of second flares.
copyright.
copperweld corp. a specialty steelmaker said 445 workers at a plant in shelby ohio began a strike after the united steelworkers local 3057 rejected a new contract on tuesday.
construction expenses of small and medium projects will be jointly borne by nepal government and the users.
the ban on cross-border movement was imposed last month after a massive exodus of emigres to west germany.
undo the last move.
they economy had to face serious problems due to imbalance between resource mobilisation and expenditure, imbalance between savings and investments and between export and import and the lack of control over population growth.
print a specific column default is 1. 'all' can be used to print all columns.
border size.
each selected object has a diamond mark in the top left corner.
all processes.
replaces text in outgoing messages according to userdefined rules.
groupware suite.
make this a recurring event.
not supported.
unknown error in presence.
list type must be a primitive type string, int, float or bool.
there is no active layer or channel to stroke to.
in the beginning land was his abode.
each selected object displays its bounding box.
this is because we realize there are good friends and bad ones.
if when trading resumes the s&p futures fall 30 points from the previous day 's close a one-hour trading halt takes effect.
the latest two funds were assembled jointly by goldman sachs & co. of the u.s. and japan 's daiwa securities co.
radial.
netherlands.
input/output.
agartala.
filmstrip.
the file is too big.
the costs per hectare of some of the government constructed projects are found to range from re. 60,000 to re 100,000 or more.
stream not found.
the position of the opposite end of the selection from the cursor in chars.
colorify custom color.
semiflatten.
but advancing issues on the new york stock exchange were tidily ahead of declining stocks 847 to 644.
it's one more for the baseball-loving lawyers accountants and real estate developers who ponied up about $ 1 million each for the chance to be an owner to step into the shoes of a gene autry or have a beer with rollie fingers.
in october 1988 21.1  said business conditions would improve.
pascal source code.
reserved keyword.
minimal position.
find broken.
version.
the board is dominated by the heirs of the late john t. dorrance jr. who controlled about 58  of campbell 's stock when he died in april.
these rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location.
special variable.
despite the flap over transplants federal funding of research involving fetal tissues will continue on a number of fronts.
transmitted packets.
image/label border.
convert to text.
overwrite.
correcting dependencies.
vpn connections.
you are not root and i cannot find any way to become root. to reconfigure this package, install the menu package, the login package, or run aptitude as root.
find.
pebble convex lantern.
store.
authors.
indeed columbia executives recently told reporters they were interested in creating a separate unit to hold columbia 's junk bonds and perhaps do merchant banking.
router with firewall.
message is not junk.
mr. edelman declined to specify what prompted the recent moves saying they are meant only to benefit shareholders when  the company is on a roll.
the consumer confidence survey covering 5,000 u.s. households is conducted in the first two weeks of each month for the conference board by national family opinion inc. a toledo ohio market researcher.
so both sides accepted the compromise which would lead to the first lifting of the minimum wage since a four-year law was enacted in 1977 raising the wage to $ 3.35 an hour from $ 2.65.
last episode.
he succeeds james a. taylor who stepped down as chairman president and chief executive in march for health reasons.
search for.
redo last zoom change.
connection problem.
fees 2 1/4.
are you sure you want to delete ?
stop.
hagerstown.
while the gross investment comprised foreign assistance to the extent of 4.5 percent of the gdp in 1074/75, this reliance was estimated to have gradually risen and reached 12 percent in 1989/90.
quit.
if you want more partitions you should first create an extended partition. such a partition can contain other partitions. because an extended partition is also a primary partition it might be necessary to remove a primary partition first.
asia/katmandu.
multiple song properties.
bad header data.
you are modifying a recurring task. what would you like to modify?
restart the game.
the application of herbicide would kill off the male-fertile plants leaving a large field of male-sterile plants that can be cross-pollinated to produce hybrid seed.
input source.
error reading paper size.
scroll.
chiclayo.
the display format for package views.
added line.
can't set and get/unset simultaneously.
eject the selected volume.
the charges were partly offset by a $ 2 million gain on the sale of investments of two joint ventures he said.
dark grey.
civil engineering components.
more common chrysotile fibers are curly and are more easily rejected by the body dr. mossman explained.
operation failed.
reverse.
what to do with dynamic title.
warping frame.
the gtkadjustment that determines the values of the horizontal position for this viewport.
entity.
identifier prefix.
camera brand.
longstate.
oy waertsilae is to contribute 200 million markkaa most of it as subordinated debt and take a minority stake in the new company.
the five of diamonds.
about 20,000 sets of learning materials teachers ' binders have also been sold in the past four years.
find.
invalid argument.
dependency problems  not removing.
toggles whether the role field is displayed.
when enabled, this will ensure that each pixel of an image gets mapped to a pixel on the screen.
relative to.
nicely arrange selected connector network.
barahona.
bush unveiled a package of trade initiatives to help establish  economic alternatives to drug trafficking  in the andean nations of south america.
number of conversations per window.
unable to mount the floppy drive. there is probably no floppy in the drive.
pict image.
enter group.
highlight quotations with.
due emphasis has been given on the reinforcement of the present financial system in order to further mobilize savings in the private sector.
pacific/galapagos.
enable key echo.
the name of the scheme file containing the solitaire game to play.
europe/andorra.
disconnect.
it was not possible, therefore, to set overall targets and goals in quantitative terms.
population-telephone ratio in nepal reached 250:1 with the availability of the service of 71,560 telephone lines in fy 1989/90.
sales totaled 1.916 trillion yen climbing 17  from 1.637 trillion yen in the year-earlier period.
the representation being used for image data.
not a regular file.
many cancer patients and others who suffer from debilitating sickness spend huge amounts of money for treatment.
statusbar.
alternate.
couldn't load the interface.
wharton.
light cyan.
next 7 days' appointments.
replace existing view.
americans will learn more about making products for the soviets.
last week miami-based carnival disclosed that waertsilae marine industries the finnish shipyard that is building carnival 's new cruise ships planned to file for bankruptcy.
no device configured.
fort nelson.
they burn the dead body according to hindu tradition.
the date must be entered in the format.
display.
it has been used to fight the locust pest that destroys the crops in the fields.
allow completely transparent regions to be filled.
invalid signature.
stopped.
align visible layers.
some media experts question whether a young magazine can risk turning off madison avenue 's big spenders.
possible values are "close" to close the terminal, and "restart" to restart the command.
slovakia.
will be downgraded.
an error occurred while trying to print.
the active pattern. click to open the pattern dialog.
the spinoff also will compete with international business machines corp. and japan 's big three hitachi ltd. nec corp. and fujitsu ltd.
secondly, the policy of economic liberalization will direct the flow of resources to productive sectors such as agriculture, industry, trade and tourism.
no devices detected.
zoom out.
archive is too short.
reset tools after create.
the previouslyselected color, for comparison to the color you're selecting now. you can drag this color to a palette entry, or select this color as current by dragging it to the other color swatch alongside.
good signature.
warning there is no layer named.
next.
compose a reply to the mailing list of the selected message.
voltage detector.
kaohsiung.
a partial gstreamer pipeline to use for this profile.
the selection of strategies and priorities, too, reflected similar drawbacks and in spite of the considerable investment made during the period, no desired progress was achieved.
hebrew visual.
copy all.
error communicating with server.
edit.
photos.
address.
besides, because of the unavoidability of using the constant prices if 1964/65 as the base for conversion of certain data to constant prices on the basis of gdp, the fiscal year 1964/65 has been taken as the initial year at certain places and the analysis has been made accordingly.
â production.
optical services router.
override serversupplied folder namespace.
goes to next large object.
assiniboia.
left margin.
save error log to file.
are you sure you want to send a message without a subject?
custom padding color.
your input device settings will be reset to default values the next time you start gimp.
certificate.
the director, story-writer, song-writer and cinematographer take it as an art work.
click to add a point on this segment.
this is the peak of my wine-making experience  mr. winiarski declared when he introduced the wine at a dinner in new york  and i wanted to single it out as such.
packages which are recommended by other packages these packages are not strictly required, but they may be necessary to provide full functionality in some other programs that you are installing or upgrading.
gimp help browser.
it has also become important to entrust full responsibility of the operation and management of irrigation systems to user farmers after soliciting their organised participation in the identification, feasibility studies, selection and implementation of irrigation systems.
authorization mechanism too weak.
nunavut.
whether the menu item looks like a radio menu item.
no price for the new shares has been set.
torrent priority.
milford.
save to file.
vertical style.
the eight of spades.
the model containing the possible values for the combo box.
africa/portonovo.
gustavus.
spyrograph.
signature.
2 stereo.
a licensing company representing the university of pennsylvania added johnson & johnson to its lawsuit challenging a university faculty member over rights to retin-a acne medicine.
the transportation department responding to pressure from safety advocates took further steps to impose on light trucks and vans the safety requirements used for automobiles.
interrupt.
trapezoid.
edges.
changing the login shell for.
move the selected item on the toolbar.
it should exhibit new books that are purchased from library grant to attract the students.
the law let scholars reporters and researchers read texts of voa material only at voa headquarters in washington but it barred them from copying texts.
couldn't read file.
shantou.
little can be done to prevent this.
currently on.
syriac.
the maximum value of the adjustment.
environment image.
log complete.
no paths found in the buffer.
heavy snow grains.
friendships are easily formed when we are young and do not demand too much out of it.
could not get layers for image.
a spokesman for visa international 's u.s. subsidiary says his company is using promotions to increase use of its cards but does n't have plans for a tie-in similar to the american express-buick link.
length.
icon to use for tabs/windows containing this profile.
columbia pictures is being acquired by sony corp. which is based in japan.
summerland.
dissipate.
it all adds up to a barrier to american-style index arbitrage the most popular form of u.s. program trading that seeks to exploit brief differences between prices of stocks in new york and the price of a futures contract in chicago based on those stocks.
hohhot.
channel terminates in a partial character.
most boosters claim the new sports complexes will be moneymakers for their city.
old script.
valid signature.
zenity notification.
the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank.
get.
end.
we have made no such statement.
filled ellipse.
error loading diagramunknown file type.
banja luka.
distribute centers equidistantly vertically.
necessary arrangements will be made to avail electricity and drinking water from the small irrigation systems, if found feasible to do so.
until the baby-faced heroes of today reclaim these ballparks for spring training there is one more.
error in podcast.
the thing that will really break this market right open is merchandising  ms. west says.
ultimately we are the real user of the nature so we should really take care of it.
activity looping.
norman ricken 52 years old and former president and chief operating officer of toys  r  us inc. and frederick deane jr. 63 chairman of signet banking corp. were elected directors of this consumer electronics and appliances retailing chain.
foreground / background colors.
therefore, in spite of the lack of larger financial investment, there will be a higher generation of capital in these sectors.
condition of an action.
elevated road.
choose menu item.
i felt stifled and thought i would suffocate.
browse files….
an evaluation of the major economic and physical indicators during this period presents a gloomy picture, although during the panchayat regime progress was made to a certain extent in areas like transportation, communication, health, drinking water, literacy and the ratio of student enrolments, but the economic achievements were vague and disappointing on the whole.
didn't understand ' pair must start with a.
regional development will be linked to the village level development and a suitable atmosphere for all citizens to share the returns of the nationâ€™s investment will be created.
radio menu item.
add to bookmarks.
pause torrent.
the new environment created by liberal economic policies will also promote the increase of the investment growth rate.
hollow triangle.
your password was successfully changed.
line wrap.
wiarton.
despite the increase in the number of tourists during this period, no increase in average stay and expenses incurred per day materialized for the lack of proper development and expansion of infrastructures and places of tourist attraction.
join style.
the width at which the text is wrapped.
read required files in advance.
if you save it, all the external changes could be lost. save it anyway?
bonobo browser.
söderhamn.
external environment.
source : fulton prebon -lrb- u.s.a.
save screenshot.
front right.
not allowed to write temporary files in.
in an interview donald beall chairman said first-half profit certainly would trail the past year 's primarily because of weakness in the heavy-truck and passenger-car markets.
whether the entry contents can be edited.
extended input devices.
retrieving songs from music share.
with the biggest wine-buying period of the year looming as the holidays approach it will be interesting to see how the superpremiums fare.
to add a column to your table, drag it into the location in which you want it to appear.
belgrade.
the agreement on poland contrasts with the major differences remaining over the underlying foreign aid bill which has already provoked veto threats by the white house and is sharply confined under this year 's budget.
basic options.
text color.
rise.
line gaps.
bluefields.
file transfer port.
all she had to do was put $ 15,000 in a certificate of deposit or qualify for a $ 10,000 personal line of credit.
show parent/child relationship between processes.
minimum width of buttons inside the box.
therefore, the reduction in the rate of population growth is one of the priority areas of this plan.
on the import front, the fiscal year 1990/91 recorded the total import of rs. 24,197.9 million, which reached rs. 32,951.3 million in fiscal year 1991/92.
last march after attending a teaching seminar in washington mrs. yeargin says she returned to greenville two days before annual testing feeling that she had n't prepared her low-ability geography students adequately.
point values to use when.
asia/magadan.
the firm 's capital moreover has n't grown at the same rate as in the past officials at these firms say.
invert.
tried to display an invalid layer.
as mentioned above, the government does not believe in excessive government control in economic activities.
default list of columns visible in the list view.
to continue, enter  to abort, enter.
transportation is one of our most basic human needs.
mail folder tree.
decompose an image into separate colorspace components.
though emphasis was given on the development and expansion of the irrigation sector in the past periodic plans, its implementation part could not be effective.
failed to read a valid greeting from pop server.
icelandic.
could not activate swap.
select which type of documents are shown.
snap to objects.
rename file to.
when enabled, the mouse pointer will be shown over the image while using a paint tool.
switch to tab 8.
while in 1990/91 the balance of payment surplus was rs. 4,781.2 million, the surplus reached rs. 4,306.6 million in the first eleven months of 1991/92.
disc file.
contact.
waste time trying to find mines.
replacing available packages info, using.
nepal is a multicultural,multilingual and multiethinic country.
glagolitic.
moisture sensor.
click to smudge.
separately john phelan told a closed house subcommittee meeting in washington that he would support securities and exchange commission halts of program trading during market emergencies.
general character properties.
out of this requirement, 21 percent only is expected to be met through the production of bhrikuti paper factory and everest paper mills.
failed to rename to.
new brunswick.
reply to all.
raise selection to top.
delete connection point.
but some investors have used such filings to boost the value of their stock holdings which without buying more stock they then sold.
arrow color.
move window one workspace up.
enhance contrast using the retinex method.
hallwood a cleveland merchant bank owns about 11  of integra.
as a result the company said it decided to phase out its oldest capacity and  make appropriate reductions  in operating expenses.
number of pieces going down.
seychelles.
education the country made some progress in the field of education in the past.
start preferred mobility assistive technology application.
extinguisher.
similarly, the current account deficit will also be reduced from 9.6 percent of gross domestic product in 1991/92 to 8.0 percent in 1996/97.
when enabled, an image will become the active image when its image window receives the focus. this is useful for window managers using "click to focus".
if these organizations are allowed to play and active role in rural development, there will emerge improvements in income distribution.
failed to open saved state file.
save creation time.
gimp output. you can minimize this window, but don't close it.
gnome path.
new england electric system bowed out of the bidding for public service co. of new hampshire saying that the risks were too high and the potential payoff too far in the future to justify a higher offer.
i 'd much rather see them dealing with interest rates and the deficit.
select the columns visible in this folder.
africa/bujumbura.
palette map.
default path.
no data captured.
start when added.
message.
binary.
show tooltips.
online since.
pagecurl.
view the important changes made in each version of.
enter the character set to use.
buddy list synchronization issue in.
although most of us get our news through the media as many of us have little time to read books or journals.
bom jesus da lapa.
revert image.
whether this tag affects the rise.
create guides.
this message cannot be sent because you have not specified any recipients.
the active image. click to open the image dialog.
max. delta.
unknown context.
rearrange the colormap.
lightsource color.
aperture value.
autocrop unused space from edges and middle.
encryption certificate for does not exist.
for the nine months ended july 29 sfe technologies reported a net loss of $ 889,000 on sales of $ 23.4 million.
reset and clear.
french.
unable to parse pattern after.
safford.
opacity.
middle value to peaks.
the appropriate utilization of the existing infrastructure of the economy will also contribute to the increase in the growth rate of gross domestic product.
set current global proxy.
extract channels.
audio information.
tile size.
scrollable.
could not move aside old saved state file.
equivalents.
this is the cutting up of logs and timber for use in the making of paper.
lower the current layer to the bottom.
patterns.
copy.
device.
send file.
select a time zone.
capri.
calendar.
next solution.
the wide disparity in economic and social facilities between the rural and urban areas has led to unprecedented increase in migration to urban areas.
stretch brightness values to cover the full range.
the relative density of the brush strokes.
delete segment.
zambia.
' is an invalid character in a configuration storage address.
mrs. hills lauded south korea for creating an intellectual-property task force and special enforcement teams of police officers and prosecutors trained to pursue movie and book pirates.
debian ' package split/join tool version.
modify luminosity channel.
there had been no marked changes in the economic structure until the fall of the panchayat regime.
mr. spiegel 's next career move is a subject of speculation on wall street.
mr. taccetta says he had just recouped the $ 5,000 he lost in the 1987 crash when he lost more money last oct. 13.
header elements.
adjust color balance.
font name.
america/nipigon.
plugin environment.
queued tracks.
page setup.
iowa and minnesota were among the few major farm states to log a decline in net cash income.
margin.
create.
google docs search plugin.
insulate.
sturgis.
show close button on tabs.
scrolling.
europe/vatican.
the value of the adjustment.
since chalk first touched slate schoolchildren have wanted to know : what 's on the test ?
deficit finance during the period under review, as the targeted growth in revenue was not achieved, concerted efforts were made towards controlling the mobilisation of deficit finance in the economy and remarkable progress was made in this regard.
says the big board 's mr. phelan  volatility is greater than program trading.
retype email address.
disconnected.
in national over-the-counter trading sfe technologies shares closed yesterday at 31.25 cents a share up 6.25 cents.
our mind set has to change to accept these people and integrate them into our society.
existing problems.
front and back.
change case.
brazil is the third-largest producer and the fifth-largest exporter of sugar in the world.
as presented by mr. chabrol and played with thin-lipped intensity by isabelle huppert marie-louise called marie latour in the film was not a nice person.
all remote users will be disconnected. are you sure?
no changes.
save current.
sometimes it may be aesthetic and very often convenience.
generate a new subkey.
royal east.
center of rotation and skewing drag to reposition scaling with shift also uses this center.
the new key is.
ports.
pitted surfaces.
font scaling factor.
karlovy vary.
divertto may not contain newlines.
mozilla.
bursa.
using libparted.
once a pattern of healthy eating is established, it would be easier to carry through such a lifestyle and for the children to follow suit.
the type of operation that the file selector is performing.
there is a treat need for reforms in the exi sting system of recruitment, positing, training and promotion.
rio branco.
error releasing lockfile.
government officials said exports at the end of the year would remain under a government target of $ 68 billion.
scroll view down.
asia/urumqi.
we have and i 'm sure others have considered what our options are and we 've had conversations with people who in the future might prove to be interesting partners.
drag to create a spiral. drag controls to edit the spiral shape. click to select.
open file.
jump to page.
package is to be removed.
initiate conference.
font size in points.
symbol, other.
prices were mixed in zurich and lower in stockholm.
about this program.
sales for the full year were $ 6.6 billion up 13  from $ 5.8 billion.
show the 'unicode control character' menu.
the incremental capital output ration is estimated to be as decline because of the projected better results of expenditures in governmental sectors to be made possible by the policy of economic liberalization in the private sector, and appropriate selection of projects, budget, expenditure, management and monitoring systems.
no changes need to be saved.
in such circumstances, people tend to act for immediate gains rather than think of the future.
you can do all this even if you 're not a reporter or a researcher or a scholar or a member of congress.
unmaximize all.
composer marc marder a college friend of mr. lane 's who earns his living playing the double bass in classical music ensembles has prepared an exciting eclectic score that tells you what the characters are thinking and feeling far more precisely than intertitles or even words would.
bulleted list.
save defaults.
arrow style at the beginning of new lines. click to pick an arrow, or set arrow parameters with details.
the patent for interleukin-3 covers materials and methods used to make the human blood cell growth factor via recombinant dna technology.
the battle has turned into a civil war at some firms and organizations causing internal contradictions and pitting employee against employee.
much however is caused by man.
parallel line interface.
if true, scroll arrows are added if there are too many tabs to fit.
i was wrong.
scrollbar is.
width pixels.
matsuyama.
sounds like.
moriarty.
at kidder a unit of general electric co. and other big brokerage firms stockbrokers battle their own firm 's program traders a few floors away.
spacing around expander arrow.
warp.
the boolean equation of the receptivity.
clear the selection.
saxony.
auto requires the use of the output option.
higher margins would chase away dozens of smaller traders who help larger traders buy and sell they say.
are you sure you want to send a message with only bcc recipients?
possibly offsetting that columbia recently estimated it has unrealized gains on publicly traded equity investments of more than $ 70 million.
image has zero height.
the ace of diamonds.
the non-transparent economic policies and regulations have given rise to rent seeking behaviour causing a considerable weakening of the financial administration.
show menu images.
override owner trust.
automatically convert.
a bailoutvalue for adaptive selections.
progress during the seventh plan department of irrigation and agriculture development bank have together developed irrigation facilities in 179,337 ha of land during the seventh plan period.
error associating schema name with key name.
bangassou.
synchronize folders locally for offline usage?
right angle.
higher education faces scarcity of physical facilities for standard pedagogy and is heavily reliant on government grants.
the administration had requested roughly the same amount for antitrust enforcement for fiscal 1990 as was appropriated in fiscal 1989.
couldn't configure secure shell keys on remote computer.
close window.
blur neighboring pixels, but only in lowcontrast areas.
could not rename back to.
ncnb corp. of charlotte n.c. recently introduced its financial connections program aimed at young adults just starting careers.
there is a glamour and glitter about it all which makes it irresistible.
minimize window.
the dispute involves darkhorse productions inc. a tv production company in which mr. trudeau is a co-owner.
you lose!
one of the fastest growing segments of the wine market is the category of superpremiums wines limited in production of exceptional quality or so perceived at any rate and with exceedingly high prices.
stop sound.
export selected snippets.
minimum allowed width of the column.
layer to bottom.
saranac lake.
height pixels.
package is not installed, so not removed.
frosinone.
mr. rapanelli recently has said the government of president carlos menem who took office july 8 feels a significant reduction of principal and interest is the only way the debt problem may be solved.
bluetooth settings….
antigua and barbuda.
the desired width of the button widget, in characters.
cannot move layer any further.
step name.
background color is set.
augsburg.
a flight a minute disturbs the whole city.
in this regard, various steps were taken to achieve a regular and convenient supply of the essential commodities for the common people such as foodgrains, salt, sugar and cement.
in the period of 1989/90-1991/92, the gross domestic product went up by 4.3 percent with the growth of 1.6 percent in agricultural sector and 8.4 percent in non-agricultural sector.
world sugar futures prices soared on rumors that brazil a major grower and exporter might not ship sugar this crop year and next.
magadan.
a single five year plan can not find a remedy to all these problems but it is imperative to take concrete steps in that direction.
therefore, it is incumbent upon nepal's government to adopt suitable policy measures to bring about an increase in savings, to discourage unproductive investment and expenditure, to provide alternative sources for the mbilisation of savings and to promote private sector investment in productive areas.
the chosen area to be exported is invalid.
reserved class.
use cosinefunction for this color component.
he has good control.
high software integrity.
assign an action to.
invalid namespace.
account has been disabled.
show rulers.
workspace.
toggle whether the currently selected action is rejected.
freeport-mcmoran the parent company holds roughly 80  of the units outstanding.
spider three decks.
alignment tool align or arrange layers and other objects.
unknown signal.
must specify one or more keys to unset.
metacity.
won.
evolution minicard.
decomposing.
it was, indeed, not at all inappropriate on a conceptual le vel to create a basis for balanced regional development through the formation of development regions based on a realistic delineation of a north-south growth axis or development corridors.
the diversification in agriculture will also assist in maintaining the ecological balance.
unparent children.
faroe islands.
decrease volume.
is not installed.
you are modifying a recurring memo. what would you like to modify?
colorize image using a sample image as a guide.
sony 's planned acquisition of guber/peters entertainment co. for $ 200 million is scheduled to close monday.
connection managers should be used.
and the nose on mr. courter 's face grows.
today 's action  transportation secretary samuel skinner said  represents another milestone in the ongoing program to promote vehicle occupant safety in light trucks and minivans through its extension of passenger car standards.
mount the volume associated with the open folder.
show or hide the canvas scrollbars.
desktop accessories.
the purchasing managers index of economic activity rose in october although it remains below 50.
while there was an investment of about rs. 1,723.4 million in cottage and small industries registered within the first nine months of f.y. 1990/91, it was estimated the in f.y. 1991/92 there would be an investment of about rs. 1,801.4 millions on 4708 industries registering within the first nine months.
image data.
notify buddies that you are typing to them.
the economics of magazine publishing pretty much require that you have a pretty solid base  of big-time ad spenders he adds.
buffalo narrows.
mark all upgradable packages which are not held for upgrade.
close diagram.
online.
seoul also has instituted effective search-and-seizure procedures to aid these teams she said.
run in terminal.
physical progress situation: 1.
the event that causes this transition to be taken.
stornoway.
the fed is coming under pressure to cut short-term interest rates due to the apparent slowing of the economy.
branch office subdued.
other email.
measurement of human development:.
type name of new folder.
the acceleration rate when you hold down a button.
border on top of drawing.
artist/album.
the utility has been collecting for the plant 's construction cost from its 3.1 million customers subject to a refund since 1986.
similarly, the number of countries with isd telephone connection increased from 38 in january 1991 to 50 in january 1992.
rogers said the shares will be convertible into class b shares but that the company has the option to redeem the shares before a conversion takes place.
spool folder tree.
number of pixels to put below lines.
toolbox.
amount to increase child's size on the top and bottom.
simulate an image painted on window blinds.
in the context of the trade structure of the country during this period, while the foods and raw materials constituted an important place in exp ort in the initial years, the industrial finished products replaced them following their substantial reduction in the later years especially during the seventh plan period.
if development activities will take place in certain place then the people and the lifestyle of people will also develop gradually.
move all.
previous chapter/movie.
fill similar colors.
an error occurred while deleting a file or directory.
fashion designers hire expensive models to market their apparels.
select buddy.
wiscasset.
michaels stores inc. which owns and operates a chain of specialty retail stores said october sales rose 14.6  to $ 32.8 million from $ 28.6 million a year earlier.
/conversation/add buddy pounce.
mr. leemans said this genetic manipulation doesn't hurt the growth of that plant.
output.
multipurpose projects of national importance,.
vertical scale.
on the desktop.
internet radio.
log filter actions.
export to anyone.
toyama.
similarly, the external factors consisted of the increas e in the rates of foreign exchange and the inflation in indian market etc.6.
view help for this application.
document ended unexpectedly while inside an attribute value.
tabs set.
ask for confirmation when deleting items.
also mr. otero was barred from association with any nasd member.
literate haskell source code.
what 's so wild about the funds ' frenzy right now is that many are trading at historically fat premiums to the value of their underlying portfolios.
another user is controlling your desktop.
base filled area on all visible layers.
about 11.6  of all program trading by new york stock exchange firms in september took place in foreign markets according to big board data.
override document restrictions, like restriction to copy or to print.
the spokesman said it is the first early retirement plan offered under its two-year cost-control strategy.
the total and sectoral value added has been determined within the framework of the model and the fact that the total and sectoral investment has a decisive impact on the overall economic growth rate has been taken into consideration.
maniwaki.
empty file details field '.
color to alpha.
thedford.
transform.
hue frequency.
the amount of space between children.
could not open for reading.
saintbrieuc.
in 1989/90, only 36 percent of the total population had drinking water facility with 67 percent and 33 percent of the urban and rural areas respectively having access to this facility.
become root.
pattern.
the announced sale of the reserves was followed by news that investor carl icahn had increased his stake in usx to 13.1  and threatened a takeover or other business combination.
strategic objectives not financial return drive many of the deals  says a venture economics spokesman.
the consistency checks performed on the inputtoken failed.
there was much pressure on balance of payments situation on account of increasing current account deficit each year due to a slow growth in income from services and transfers during this period.
volume was 372.9 million shares up from 334.5 million on tuesday.
no '/' in key.
oxnard.
hidden.
they know that she is the one who can solve problems.
bad code encountered.
gzip archive.
empathy can use the cellular network to guess the location.
openoffice.org writer template.
al qaysumah.
tabs.
resizing.
responses lost.
folder name.
compared to the seventh plan, a slight increase is proposed in the sectoral shares of investment in agriculture, irrigation, forestry, trade, hotel and restaurants and social services.
minimum length of the search key in order to look up matches.
querying.
and construction also was described as slow in most areas.
the lack of structural change in production hindered the development process from gaining momentum.
save resolution.
founded by brooklyn n.y. publishing entrepreneur patricia poore garbage made its debut this fall with the promise to give consumers the straight scoop on the u.s. waste crisis.
while giving the comprehensive test of basic skills to ninth graders at greenville high school last march 16 she spotted a student looking at crib sheets.
navigation.
window type.
as the deals also improve japanese access to american technology and market knowledge they feed american anxieties in this area too.
is not a valid uri scheme.
search folders.
feature not implemented.
south and south west england.
the jungle presents a great variety of animals with different kinds of furs and feathers.
could not install the selected language support.
hides the perfolder preview and removes the selection.
nagpur.
enter your password.
unminimize the window.
active window.
according to ms. poore old-house journal corp. her publishing company printed and sold all 126,000 copies of the premiere issue.
intranet.
unsubscribe.
by name.
zoom scale.
the traditions and famous hospitality of its many different groups are indeed a major part of what makes nepal so special.
scroll right.
corrupted archive.
adjust the spike density.
south hill.
make the current document fill the window.
enable or disable type ahead search feature.
feather selection by.
reading error.
land reform was, in fact, an essential programme in a feudalistic rural society, but the inability to prepare accurate land records, lack of the guarantee of tenancy right, the existence of dual or multi ownership of land, inability to provide land for shelter and subsistence income, failure to keep records and make proper utilization of the collected savings, lack of diversification in crop farming and cottage industries in the rural sector and, above al, the lack of desirable growth in production and productivity during the thirty years of the panchayat regime have clearly evidenced the failure of land reform.
style scheme filename.
los angeles is a sprawling balkanized newspaper market and advertisers seemed to feel they could buy space in the mammoth times then target a particular area with one of the regional dailies.
preview is out of date.
revert to ?
page setup.
at present, the average lifeexpectancy of the nepalese people is estimated to have reached 54 years.
case sensitive.
output of goods-producing industries increased 0.1.
redirected to invalid uri.
it remains unclear whether the bond issue will be rolled over.
select number color.
vertical position of child in available space. 0.0 is top aligned, 1.0 is bottom aligned.
lightsource type.
use to open the selected image.
check style.
boolean logic.
major grid line every.
without the cray-3 research and development expenses the company would have been able to report a profit of $ 19.3 million for the first half of 1989 rather than the $ 5.9 million it posted.
package extension list is too long.
ängelholm.
cannot convert approximated spline yet.
remember the current tool, pattern, color, and brush across gimp sessions.
others just released from the majors hope the senior league will be their bridge back into the big-time.
funnel cloud.
very dark.
most of the picture is taken up with endless scenes of many people either fighting or eating and drinking to celebrate victory.
bishkek.
determine the remote servers that can be logged into.
move patterns in fill or stroke along with the objects.
hat yai.
allow multiple files to be selected.
do you want to mark all messages as read?
ringers she added are  filled with the solemn intoxication that comes of intricate ritual faultlessly performed.
width of the vertical border of tab labels.
grande prairie.
all packages.
maximize the window.
window title.
warning login reenabled after temporary lockout.
out of the total export, the export to india was rs. 1,701.2 million in 1990/91 and reached to rs. 1,568.9 million in 1991/92.
put text into a frame path or shape, creating a flowed text linked to the frame object.
estimates of development materials following is the estimated requirement of construction and development materials during the plan period for development programmes to be implemented during the eighth plan.
/hide this type.
display right margin.
sort by state.
signatures.
regarded as the father of the supercomputer mr. cray was paid $ 600,000 at cray research last year.
stretch image contrast to cover the maximum possible range.
natashquan.
image type.
grand canyon.
nearby cities such as pasadena and long beach also have large dailies.
select.
quit gparted?
cannot create folder  folder exists.
they worry about their careers drink too much and suffer through broken marriages and desultory affairs.
special file.
the owner of the key revoked the key. it can no longer be used.
ahvaz.
2.take a hawaiian vacation.
company directory.
pitt meadows.
schema specifies type list but doesn't specify the type of the list elements.
this will also facilitate the evaluation of the impact on the economy of the growth of economic efficiency created by the sectoral policy measures such as appropriate regional allocation of resources, selection of suitable projects and monitoring system, prudent economic management, economic openness and privatization.
progress.
bad signature.
faster.
tirana.
move waste on to a reserve slot.
move objects as little as possible so that their bounding boxes do not overlap.
the banks have 28 days to file an appeal against the ruling and are expected to do so shortly.
generic error.
cyrillic/ukrainian.
clipped to bottom layer.
people may in some cases have complete and direct control over these processes in other cases the control may be partial or indirect.
progname.
copy the selection.
reading.
optimize.
the japanese fret openly about the u.s. public 's rancor.
apply effect.
selected files.
the firm and the nasd differ over the meaning of markup and markdown he added.
to place packages on hold.
exception activating.
create difference of selected paths bottom minus top.
terrell.
vero beach.
the big problem however is that there 's no guarantee that this reasoning will be limited to des or to drugs.
justify.
keyboard shortcut to reset and clear the terminal.
add a new criterion to this search.
but rep. hammerschmidt said that the provision which he dubbed a  special interest  amendment was likely to make the bill even more controversial.
document not reverted.
mosaic.
the offer which follows a $ 55-a-share bid that was rejected in september steps up pressure on the chemicals concern.
returning exception.
save as.
more often than not ringers think of the church as something stuck on the bottom of the belfry.
attendees.
contact and communication with non -governmental organizations will be enhanced in order to understand their problems and provide necessary support.
http moniker.
the nasdaq composite index added 1.01 to 456.64 on paltry volume of 118.6 million shares.
a seat on the chicago mercantile exchange was sold for $ 410,000 down $ 6,000 from the previous sale oct.
westfield.
select objects to raise to top.
volgograd.
the selected year.
scalable vector graphics import and export filters.
sales rose 5  to $ 4.4 billion from $ 4.2 billion.
dampen.
development of rural infrastructure in order to support industrial growth, the market for industrial production will be expanded in rural areas by providing roads and other forms of transportation linking rural communities and market centres.
even when the valley is so jammed up, people haven’t stopped coming here.
high cost economy : in view of the inaccessibility and the ruggedness of terrain it is not unusual for the production and delivery costs to be high.
editor for entity relations diagrams.
the default file extension for this profile.
the big board the nation 's premier stock exchange is sharply divided between its floor traders and its top executives.
experts say there is n't another state in the country where tests mean as much as they do in south carolina.
main game.
beziergon.
it helps persons who are far-away from their country not only to enjoy their national songs or concerts but also to see the artistes.
cannot open aptitude state file.
the first five year plan, prepared by the board, covered the 1956-61 periods.
but the 1989 fall total of 80 while well below 1988 activity shows  a steady ratcheting up in citizen referenda and initiatives  says patrick mcguigan editor of family law and democracy report.
since young i have been fascinated by works of science fiction.
collate.
enable/disable caret mode.
copy settings.
the amount of highlighting on the edges of each piece.
open public key.
chinese simplified.
prompt on empty subject.
color deficit simulation filter brettelvienotmollon algorithm.
deform mode.
gnome includes most of what you see on your computer, including the file manager, web browser, menus, and many applications.
unknown date format.
unable to add to your buddy list.
the decline was even steeper than in september.
quit.
a network error occurred.
clone of.
could not create gnome accelerators directory '.
whether lines are wrapped at widget edges.
inches.
in spite of the immense hydropower potential of the country, it has not been possible to significantly exploit this due to the lack of resources.
crime against the person and against property.
parameters were saved to.
card holders who receive the letter also are eligible for a sweepstakes with buick cars or a hawaii vacation as prizes.
wake me up.
play or pause the movie.
previously he was vice president of eastern edison.
analysts said the herald 's demise does n't necessarily represent the overall condition of the newspaper industry.
the offer advertised in today 's editions of the wall street journal is scheduled to expire at the end of november.
we do n't think there is cause for concern at the moment.
error adding contact.
frenchville.
crop tool remove edge areas from image or layer.
completion model.
role.
poverty alleviation, and c.
asia/kuwait.
error parsing command line.
expects the first argument to be a string.
ascending.
playlist index.
public policy favors the development and marketing of beneficial new drugs even though some risks perhaps serious ones might accompany their introduction because drugs can save lives and reduce pain and suffering  the unanimous court said.
would you like to send all the participants a cancelation notice?
vertical separator width.
i personally don't enjoy seeing players who i remember vividly from their playing days running about and being gallant about their deficiencies  says roger angell new yorker magazine's resident baseball sage.
try ubuntu kylin netbook without installing.
although final details were n't available sources said the dingell plan would abandon the president 's proposal for a cap on utilities ' sulfur-dioxide emissions.
and executives at stations in such major markets as washington ; providence r.i. ; cleveland ; raleigh n.c. ; minneapolis and louisville ky. say they may very well not renew  cosby.
danbury.
can't rotate ellipse.
as a result of the continuing heavy dependence of gross domestic production on water conditions, the trends of annual fluctuations in economic growth rate persisted.
in 1989/90, only 36 percent of the total population had drinking water facility with 67 percent and 33 percent of the urban and rural areas respectively having access to this facility.
the loan disbursement ration of the commercial banks which stood at 60.6 percent in june/july 1962, steadily rose to 70.1 percent in june/july 1990.
server challenge contained invalid "quality of protection" token.
ubuntu default theme.
and consumer groups hope that judge curry 's byron 1 order may set a precedent for a second nuclear rate case involving commonwealth edison 's braidwood 2 plant.
perspective tool change perspective of the layer, selection or path.
michael r. bromwich a member since january 1987 of the three-lawyer trial team in the prosecution of oliver north became a partner in the washington d.c. office of the 520-lawyer firm.
odd character expected a  after attribute name of element.
ports in the great lakes and atlantic coast can also relieve pressure on new orleans.
countries in the region also are beginning to consider a framework for closer economic and political ties.
to pick a background color.
can't install.
filename.
suffix.
use "dot for dot" by default.
show help.
bold.
analysts attributed the increases partly to the $ 4 billion disaster-assistance package enacted by congress.
no error.
render windows metafile.
left double quote.
the following packages will be automatically removed.
this is a digitally encrypted message part.
a $ 107.03 million offering of santa ana community redevelopment agency calif. tax allocation bonds got off to a slow start and may be repriced at lower levels today according to an official with lead underwriter donaldson lufkin & jenrette securities corp.
no uri to play.
nelson.
purple 2.
space which is inserted at the edges of the icon view.
unknown user.
the domestic credit went up by 130.9 percent during that period.
open a new window.
if set, wrap lines if the text becomes too wide.
rockwell international corp. won a $ 130.7 million air force contract for ac-130u gunship replacement aircraft.
press enter to convert to a selection.
education is the backbone of development.
hallock.
color fill.
the problem has been further compounded by the fact that the agricultural labour force has to rely excessively on the monsoon.
reporting a bug in.
scale.
mr. conlon was executive vice president and director of the equity division of the international division of nikko securities co.
i think that this magazine is not only called *-1 garbage but it is practicing journalistic garbage  fumes a spokesman for campbell soup.
trabzon.
according to a nationwide survey taken a year ago nearly a third of england 's church bells are no longer rung on sundays because there is no one to ring them.
air service was operated to 36 destinations in the domestic sector and to ten major cities in foreign countries in 1990.91 and the same situation was maintained in the fiscal year 1991/92,too.
the connection to this server was refused.
woman blue.
what the investors who oppose the proposed changes object to most is the effect they say the proposal would have on their ability to spot telltale  clusters  of trading activity buying or selling by more than one officer or director within a short period of time.
subscription request.
zoom in.
under the circumstances dataproducts said mr. tomash said he was unable to devote the time required because of other commitments.
file /overwrites the one in the package.
sioux lookout.
caret.
arbitrary base number.
entity did not end with a semicolon most likely you used an ampersand character without intending to start an entity  escape ampersand as.
/conversation/alias.
dennis hayes and dale heatherington two atlanta engineers were co-developers of the internal modems that allow pcs to share data via the telephone.
even the 7.2  return from the risk-free three-month treasury bill has easily outdistanced the 4.1  return from junk bonds  wrote moody 's economist john lonski in yesterday 's market report.
automatically spellcheck the current document.
view defaults.
this raises the key issue : what to do about people who suffer serious injuries from beneficial drugs ?
firewall router.
revolving door.
plugin can only handle layers as animation frames.
layer name.
windows network.
greater involvement of orivate sector in required in the generaion and distribution of hydro -electricity, too.
split segment uniformly.
it has recurrences.
high quality preview.
the idea was to buffet building products from cycles in new-home construction.
the promotion helped riviera sales exceed the division 's forecast by more than 10  buick said at the time.
name of file system backend to use.
bullhead city.
delay in seconds until showing the next image.
norwich.
manzini.
komatsu predicted that for the fiscal year ending march 31 sales will climb to 600 billion yen from 566.54 billion yen ; pretax profit was forecast at 35 billion yen up from 28.53 billion yen in fiscal 1989.
create new objects with.
indexed.
british indian ocean territory.
allahabad.
button layouts.
macroeconomic stabilization the expansionary policy adopted in the past has given rise to excessive liquidity, increasing money supply, increasing trade imbalance and high price rise.
centrifugal ventilator.
little by little, we increased the distance as our stamina improved.
examples.
a jackson shared phenomenon.
voiceenabled router.
maximum new image size.
text color.
zone.
while mr. dallara and japanese officials say the question of investors ' access to the u.s. and japanese markets may get a disproportionate share of the public 's attention a number of other important economic issues will be on the table at next week 's talks.
professors philip kurland of the university of chicago and laurence tribe of harvard law school said any effort by president bush to claim authority for a line-item veto would contradict the text of the constitution and the intent of its authors as well as the views of previous presidents.
arctic village.
pentagon. five sided shape.
glasnost may be partly responsible but soviet foreign minister eduard shevardnadze last year admitted  the exaggerated ideological approach undermined tolerance intrinsic to unesco.
selection only or whole document.
no light.
ludington.
guizhou.
declining issues slightly outnumbered advancing issues 454 to 451.
sets the canvas padding color used if the padding mode is set to custom color.
xft hint style.
logo background color is set.
ignore all.
show photo of the sender.
dependency generation.
line left.
the plan was filed jointly with unsecured creditors in federal bankruptcy court in new york and must be approved by the court.
online status.
expire.
audio cd.
flags for how dateedit looks.
south european.
couldn't locate backend module for '.
provision.
clickdrag to insert an anchor on the path.
memory usage information.
laplace.
msn.
each country has its own kind of geographical structure.
horizontally aligned resistor.
chicopee falls.
get a hint for your next move.
first law.
spacing.
categories.
lappeenranta.
algorithm.
izmir.
data encipherment.
some packages could not be installed. this may mean that you have requested an impossible situation or if you are using the unstable distribution that some required packages have not yet been created or been moved out of incoming.
details.
the padding to insert at the top of the widget.
move a single point.
differentiate.
last year dsm had 71 million guilders of extraordinary charges for the restructuring program and other transactions.
16th.
rename.
patches of fog.
japanese press reports have speculated that the japanese contribution could rise to between 20  and 25  under the new program.
character.
next zoom.
exponent.
we acquire citizenship of our country generally by virtue of our birth.
lower.
ignoring invalid keybinding.
certificate is the only message, cannot verify certificates.
efforts of scientists to retrieve energy from wind through wind mills are praise worthy.
config indirect moniker.
foreign trade and balance of payments situation: 6.1 foreign trade:an analysis of the data of the past years (1962-1990) reveals that the situation of foreign trade of the country was not in a good shape.
orders for durable goods were up 0.2  to $ 127.03 billion after rising 3.9  the month before.
function type.
development is necessary because nothing remains the same forever.
select the number of uniform parts in which to split the selected segment.
batesville.
comment tagging.
characters no spaces.
to do.
issuer unique id.
cannot send a directory.
couldn't create directory '.
size map editor.
plate exchanger.
bitmap to use as a mask when drawing the text background.
openoffice.org writer global document.
electric command single coil.
unknown value.
append.
it is said that nepal is garden of four castes and thirty-six sub-castes.
inverted question mark.
ethiopic extended.
find previous.
the culture of nepal is rich and unique.
in the case of accidents involving vehicles there are many causes.
file browser root directory.
has changed the topic to.
side left.
statusbar.
run 'help' to see a full list of available command line options.
save playlist.
type a user to block.
failed to link new stream into gstreamer pipeline.
limburg.
alexander city.
interactive python console.
inversion.
oda document.
no schema known for '.
changing the aging information for.
mrs. hills said that the u.s. is still concerned about  disturbing developments in turkey and continuing slow progress in malaysia.
but c.j.b. marshall vicar of a nearby church feels the fault is in the stairs from the bell tower that are located next to the altar.
evolution integration configuration.
identifying.
the color profile of your primary monitor.
prefix where gnome was installed.
import paths.
the classics have zoomed in price to meet the competition and it almost seems that there 's a race on to come up with the priciest single bottle among current releases from every major wine region on the globe.
the directory is being replaced by a nondirectory.
ugaritic.
display question dialog.
macedonia.
but mr. hahn rose swiftly through the ranks demonstrating a raw intelligence that he says he knew he possessed early on.
rockport.
error reading file.
roomlist.
version 1.
funafuti.
i draw a blank.
searching for an existing version of this appointment.
mark the selected package as having been manually installed it will not be removed unless you manually remove it.
view and/or adjust the actions that will be performed.
during this plan period, reforms through appropriate measures will be introduced in order to make the development administration capable enough to meet the challenges of national development.
multilayer switch with silicon subdued.
the basic needs programme had adopted a supply oriented approach in its formulation paying no attention to the purchasing power of the proposed consumers.
not allowed inside.
get user info.
size of thumbnails.
linear gradient stroke.
roads prior to 1950, the facility of motorable road in the country was almost nonexistent.
objectives and priorities of the eighth plan objectives: the broad objective of the eighth plan is to given definite direction to the social and economic upliftem ent of the citizens of the country by tackling the challenges of economic stagnation, increasing poverty, structural anomalies, environmental degradation and rapid population growth.
hide main window.
warning the home directory already exists. not copying any file from skel directory into it.
video.
for an unknown trigger type.
centered.
on edges.
notwithstanding the encouragement provided for the development of the industrial sector in the past, this sector remained in its rudimentary stage.
long holidays also give a break to the children, who active by nature, are cooped up for hours in a stuffy classroom.
but the strength in heating oil helped push up crude oil.
move titlebar onscreen.
select a text and one or more paths or shapes to flow text into frame.
it is also essential to curtail unproductive expenditures.
bujumbura.
projects more likely to benefit small farmers and backward communities,.
you are about to save a layer mask asthis will not save the visible layers.
read error on file '.
table creation options.
a network address was not specified.
dot size.
deal another hand.
type mismatch.
last year 's record net cash income confirms the farm sector 's rebound from the agricultural depression of the early 1980s.
the documents also said that although the 64-year-old mr. cray has been working on the project for more than six years the cray-3 machine is at least another year away from a fully operational prototype.
special constant.
spelling suggestions.
when i felt a few big drops on my head, i decided to head for a bus stop, about a hundred meters away.
beaver falls.
hardware support.
export promotion and diversification the rapid widening of trade and current account deficits in recent years has become a matter of serious concern to the country.
cut image into paper tiles, and slide them.
paulatuk.
alternate external entity.
long-term bond prices rose despite prospects of a huge new supply of treasury debt this month.
object instance's name formatted for assistive technology access.
received request to drop all cached data.
modified.
a programme to control the increasing population was indeed indispensable.
signing message.
while jute and jute goods, rice, pulse and timber were main exportable in the initial years, the industrial finished products such as the woolen carpets and readymade garments became main exportable in the later years.
the default mixer tracks used by the multimedia key bindings.
zoom level.
his appointment to that post which has senior administrative staff and policy responsibilities followed a several-year tenure as reuters 's editor in chief.
shadow group  no user.
similarly, in comparison with other development regions, far western region and mid western region lag far behind in respect of infrastructural and social service facilities and other development works.
retry.
enter the server which hosts the room, or leave it empty if the room is on the current account's server.
carman.
a named icon to use as the logo for the about box.
wrap.
no stops in gradient.
message is junk.
the selected files cannot be moved to the trash.
the mathematics section of the widely used california achievement test asks fifth graders :  what is another name for the roman numeral ix ?
account type.
writing to temporary mailbox failed.
update.
add to address book.
the vacation packages include hotel accommodations and in some cases tours or tickets to local attractions but not meals.
version 2.
bryansk.
it is thought that both man and woman must be equally educated and they are like the two wings of a bird.
tag table.
active plugins.
control.
you have been kicked off by.
zoom drawing if window size changes.
wants to send you.
put another way the decline in the yield suggests stocks have gotten pretty rich in price relative to the dividends they pay some market analysts say.
due to this, forward and backward linkages of the economy with other sectors could not be developed.
preview text shown in the dialog.
selective gaussian blur.
for years pet food volume was flat the company said.
left attach.
thread group.
select original.
preferred height.
default character encoding.
delegatees.
users.
sales figures of the test-prep materials are n't known but their reach into schools is significant.
the population census, sample agricultural survey, a national income estimate and other statistical and survey activities have provided greater knowledge about the economy.
africa/lagos.
remove backdrop.
following the formation of the nepali congress government with a clean mandate in the general elections held in may 1991, the national planning commission in the course of formulation the eighth plan brought out for circulation and approach paper of the plan.
syncing folder.
yamagata.
pacific/majuro.
rename selected item.
modify blue channel.
stock prices closed higher in stockholm amsterdam and frankfurt and lower in zurich.
durant.
zoom 12.
this is, however, incompatible with the general trends towards economic liberalization.
discharge.
row has children.
message text.
do n't wait a savings institution needs your help now ! every day you delay a savings institution 's health and the federal budget deficit grows worse.
cursor visible.
name of the font family, e.g. sans, helvetica, times, monospace.
must specify one or more keys to recursively unset.
move selection to layer above.
mrs. yeargin says that she also wanted to help lift greenville high school 's overall test scores usually near the bottom of 14 district high schools in rankings carried annually by local newspapers.
but the flow of investment could not be channeled to industries with long term benefits due to the lack of proper implementation mechanism, procedural constraints and administrative delay.
buying for the most part carried over from the previous session and traders apparently ignored reports that a chilean mine strike may have ended almost before it began an analyst said.
personal settings.
picker dialog.
america/lima.
draws lines between the control points. only during curve creation.
drawing cancelled.
asia/novosibirsk.
unable to send meeting information, the meeting does not exist.
baltic.
time is the same thing as the flowing river.
adaptive supersample.
quitting without saving modified diagrams.
an error occurred while loading a directory.
fits file keeps no displayable images.
internet access device.
this increase in manpower demand in expected to take place as a result of the increase in investment in different sectors of the economy and the subsequent rise in value added.
when i reached home.
remove the selected item from the toolbar.
the department would be required to block the buy-out if the acquisition is likely to financially weaken a carrier so that safety would be impaired ; its ability to compete would be sharply diminished ; it would be put into foreign control ; or if the transaction would result in the sale of airline-related assets unless selling such assets had an overriding public benefit.
haines junction.
how far in the y direction to move the arrow when the button is depressed.
as a result the market 's dividend yield dividends as a percentage of price has slid to a level that is fairly low and unenticing by historical standards.
moving folder.
similarly, the policies of loan disbursement by commercial banks in productive, priority-accorded sectors need to be intensified so as to gradually alleviate poverty through the creation of new employment opportunities for the economic upliftment of the low income rural population.
this is misleading since expenditures on these activities, although separately shown in the target figures, are included in the departmental totals of realized magnitudes.
dependency information will be shown.
transportation is the act of moving something from one place to another.
select the date from a calendar.
hebrew visual.
configure keyboard shortcuts.
nl is officially making the offer.
copy parameters.
grid size.
fees 1 5/8.
must specify one or more directories to get subdirs from.
the horizontal image resolution.
align right.
randomize step.
asia/pontianak.
copy web link.
cc.
save directory.
if a person stands facing towards the east at 8 am, he cannot see the scene of sunrise.
he cannot get out of doors.
adjust the opacity of the spikes.
occupied.
not logged in.
set as background.
draw freehand lines.
invalid parameters.
the number of rows in the table.
if the revenue grows at this rate, the total revenue will reach 10.2 percent at current prices and 6.2 percent at constant prices of the gross domestic product.
octal number.
milliseconds.
goes to previous form field.
canvas size.
john f. barrett 40 formerly executive vice president and chief financial officer was named president and chief operating officer posts which had been vacant.
unable to locate package.
la rochelle.
this holds good even in the matter of road accidents.
he notes that program traders have a commission cost advantage because of the quantity of their trades that they have a smaller margin requirement than individual investors do and that they often can figure out earlier where the market is heading.
abu dhabi.
maximize vertically.
but it is not installed.
netflow router.
draw a grid on the image.
rejected patch file.
per mille.
jaffrey.
show size in font info mode.
there is an instinct to go out to the job, and with all save workaholics.
this led to an increased dependence on internal and external borrowings.
the speed of his transaction is n't to be feared either because faster and cleaner execution is desirable not loathsome.
zoom to fit drawing in window.
line numbers.
the image file was not found in that directory. using the file instead.
the principal reason behind the fall in current account deficit was the slackness experienced in the increase of trade deficit.
georgian.
could not send.
the degree of enlargment.
after two months of talks our rating was maintained.
export promotion and diversification the rapid widening of trade and current account deficits in recent years has become a matter of serious concern to the country.
/tools.
the man was charles z. wick.
start moving the window via the keyboard.
shade under curl.
type.
two or more dialog options specified.
pixels.
logical not.
punjabi.
pick black point.
failed to clean up file.
strikethrough.
larger previews.
individual.
similarly, compared to the seventh plan, the investment share of industry, trade, hotel and restaurants and social services will also increase in the eight plan.
revoke key.
similarly, current account deficit increased at 32 percent per annum or by 64.5 times in 1989/90 in comparison to 1974/75.
important messages.
duplicate shadow password entry.
but in addition to these realities, the cost component of the economy has been further aggravated by the dominance of donor driven projects, economically unproductive investments, lack of discipline, limited economic resources of projects, unwarranted expansion of bureaucracy and lack of efficient implementation capabilities.
filename to load and display.
idle.
spatial transformation.
scoring high and learning materials are the best-selling preparation tests.
label.
preformatted.
run evince in fullscreen mode.
the oct. 13 plunge was triggered not by program traders but by news of the unraveling of the $ 6.79 billion buy-out of ual corp.
during the plan period, an effective monitoring and evaluation system will be devised and institutionalized, which will not only ensure the timely implementation of projects but also encourage management accountability and performance oriented evaluation system in the public sector.
horizontal scrollbar policy.
a scholar may go through serious writing for the sake of enriching his knowledge.
message may have not been sent because a timeout occurred.
seldovia.
streets and alleys.
despeckle.
show previous object.
ronneby.
in chile workers at two copper mines los bronces and el soldado which belong to the exxon-owned minera disputada yesterday voted to begin a full strike tomorrow an analyst said.
tango.
klerksdorp.
similarly, at the secondary school level, the number of schools increased from 156 in 1961 to 1959 in april 1990, the number of teachers from 1,772 to 10,421 and the number of students from 26,845 to 264,525.
the topic that attracted participants ' attention was mitsubishi estate 's purchase of 51  of rockefeller center properties announced late monday in new york.
africa.
blend.
check if you would like to have the table captioned.
process view sort column.
select destination folder.
changelog of.
mineral oils the items under mineral oils are petrol, diesel, kerosene oil, aviation fuel, light diesel oil, furnace oil, l.p.
control of population growth the available resources in the country cannot forever sustain the current rate of population growth.
errors were encountered while processing.
the los angeles times with a circulation of more than 1.1 million dominates the region.
grenada.
contents.
color averaging.
cannot parse search expression.
mr. stoltzman tied the composer in by proclaiming him  the great improviser of the 18th century  and then built on the image by joining with mr. douglas in some bach two-part inventions cleverly arranged for clarinet and bassoon by mr. douglas.
lithuanian.
progress during the seventh plan: department of irrigation and agriculture development bank have together developed irrigation facilities in 179,337 ha of land during the seventh plan period.
spacing.
change the intensity of the blue channel.
load cml explorer parameters.
/options/enable sounds.
select a file to open.
chignik.
expander column.
the dollar rose.
i think it would be irresponsible and i am not about to be blackmailed by japanese banks or any other international interests.
the eighth plan has given priority to the production and promotion of both traditional agricultural commodities and new exportable products.
error during open of fits file.
error opening directory.
colorado springs.
our intensive discussions with jaguar at their invitation  gm said  have as their objectives to create a cooperative business relationship with jaguar that would provide for the continued independence of this great british car company to ensure a secure future for its employees and to provide an attractive long-term return for its shareholders.
menu editor.
the money supply level increased at the rate of 17.6 percent from mid july 1989 to mid july 1991, as a result of which the money supply level which stood at rs. 11,775.4 million in mid july 1989 reached rs. 16,283.6 million in mid july 1991.
default zoom level.
setup the page settings for your current printer.
customers holding contracts for waertsilae marine 's undelivered ships are expected to subscribe most of the remaining 170 million markkaa in share capital government officials said.
in lower-secondary education, the student enrolment figure being 344,138, the number of schools 3,964 and the number of teachers 74,849, the school-student ratio remained at 1:87 and teacher-student ration at 1:28 by mid april 1990.
clickdrag to move the handle around.
system policy prevents setting global keyboard settings.
other contributor other contributors.
whether this tag affects the paragraph background color.
delete feed only.
when necessary it sought and received assistance from organized crime.
unable to send message tocould not create the conference.
open preferences for the calligraphy tool.
isometric directional map shapes.
london late eurodollars : 8 3/4  to 8 5/8  one month ; 8 13/16  to 8 11/16  two months ; 8 3/4  to 8 5/8  three months ; 8 5/8  to 8 1/2  four months ; 8 1/2  to 8 7/16  five months ; 8 1/2  to 8 3/8  six months.
one can ignore that and lead a life that exposes one to many healthy hazards.
show the desktop.
checkerboard.
mime type.
alternativesnot allowed in field.
the metric used for the ruler.
do preview.
find objects in document.
/buddies/get user info.
heavy drizzle.
install, dependencies.
osoyoos.
could not save file.
the official news agency pap said the increases were intended to bring unrealistically low energy charges into line with production costs and compensate for a rise in coal prices.
unable to find docid in the help path.
it is right that we condemn these despicable acts.
it results the economic development of a person, society and country.
the panel ruled that the restrictions do n't violate the freedom of speech of health care providers and that the limits on counseling services do n't violate the rights of pregnant women.
needs action.
thirdly, as the eighth plan lays special emphasis on rural development, there will be a considerable increase in people's participation and the contribution of labour.
start event  multiple.
deal a new card from the deck.
x position of child widget.
zaragoza.
cannot open maildir directory path.
but mr. lane said that while the sec regulates who files the law tells them when to do so.
move the selected controller up.
you cannot save a cursor mask for an image which has no alpha channel.
at the economic growth rate of 5.1 percent, the government revenue will increase by 9.7 percent, but the share of negative savings will continue to be high due to its increasing trend in the past.
pressure transducer.
huesaturation.
property has no value.
inflation and widespread unemployment are the chief dangers.
at the start of the appointment.
the three japanese companies build the body sections of the 767 accounting for a combined 15  of the aircraft.
it became clearly evident that the contribution of the increased area was pivotal to whatever increase took place in production growth.
but they invite great trouble for the future.
receiving from.
use radio buttons for first column.
created.
nowadays, one can get many types of vitamins as well as herbs in capsules or tablets from the pharmacies, clinics or even the supermarket.
peter marcus an analyst with painewebber inc. said that a downturn in the appliance industry coupled with sluggish automotive sales hurt usx results.
from the human point of view most people would grade the importance of the senses in the order given in the question.
no month change.
log analysis.
the french film maker claude chabrol has managed another kind of weird achievement with his  story of women.
aniak.
laplace.
id or alias of the component to be shown by default at startup.
is not a valid character following a  character it may not begin an element name.
sales of passenger cars grew 22  from a year earlier to 361,376 units.
displace.
volatility surrounding his trades occurs not because of index arbitrage but because his is a large addition or subtraction to a widget market with finite liquidity.
test result.
turn.
public communication means will be used while implementing the programme with a view to provide equa1 opportunity to all for participation.
new path options.
no file.
orientation and growth direction of the progress bar.
however five other countries china thailand india brazil and mexico will remain on that so-called priority watch list as a result of an interim review u.s. trade representative carla hills announced.
kathmandu.
particularly flagrant  mrs. dole said  are the company 's numerous failures to properly record injuries at its fairless works in spite of the firm promise it had made in an earlier corporate-wide settlement agreement to correct such discrepancies.
std dev.
there occurred an excessive flow of foreign loans to bring down balance of payment deficit to a favourable situation in the years past.
researchers at plant genetic systems n.v. in belgium said they have developed a genetic engineering technique for creating hybrid plants for a number of key crops.
i do n't see any signs that inventories are excessive.
top neighbor.
troyes.
the media is not only an important source of news and opinions but also entertainment.
artist album  number  title.
it is n't clear however whether support for the proposal will be broad enough to pose a serious challenge to the white house 's acid-rain plan.
show one day.
switch to the layer above the current.
according to available statistics, while the forest coverage was 6,402,000 ha. in 1964, this was reduced to 6,306,000 ha. by the end of f.y. 1985/85.
use doublesized grab handles.
edit full.
the big problem is that usx management has proved unwilling to devote the necessary resources and manpower to removing hazards and to * safeguarding safety and health in the plants  said linda anku osha regional administrator in philadelphia.
irrigation projects in under-construction stage.
unknown mime type.
select items from the list below.
compress diagram files.
keep icons sorted by modification date in rows.
input levels.
pine springs.
copy link address.
translate.
select none.
current location.
highlight matching brackets.
the department 's occupational safety and health administration proposed fines of $ 6.1 million for alleged violations at the company 's fairless hills pa. steel mill ; that was a record for proposed penalties at any single facility.
modules.
â b energy development energy plays an important role in the economy, in respect of both domestic and exports sectors of the economy.
negotiable bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order.
drizzle.
font variant set.
b - current annual yield.
phone feature.
postal services by the fiscal year 1990/91, there were all together 2231 post offices consisting of 1 general post office, 74 district post offices, 477 area post offices and 1676 additional post offices.
key has been compromised.
as regards the sale and distribution of production inputs in f.y. 1990/91, 72,719 metric tons of chemical fertilizers and 2,325 metric tons of seeds were sold.
there is $ 49.9 million of fifth series bonds which are subject to the federal alternative minimum tax.
there are no items to show in this view.
altenburg.
diaper shortages this summer limited growth at stork diaper services springfield mass. where business is up 25  in also spurring the move to cloth : diaper covers with velcro fasteners that eliminate the need for safety pins.
torrent.
bad default setting!
no sheet named.
cannot copy messages to the junk folder.
pixels.
start all.
pierre vinken 61 years old will join the board as a nonexecutive director nov. 29.
error displaying connection information.
color deficient vision.
unexpected error.
unable to stat.
set the filename.
unsubscribe.
zoom to 21.
cannot verify message signature incorrect message format.
line  invalid line.
furthermore, as various projects at different stages of implementation are being funded by foreign aid and as their closure would not only entail a wastage of foreign aid in development expenditure and the share of loan in total foreign aid are estimated to be more or less equivalent to those in 1989/90.
geometry width, height.
shift draw around the starting point.
icon selector.
allow tile splitting.
saving canceled.
bzip archive.
percent.
fortran source code.
this option is not available. please see help for all possible usages.
swan river.
the death of the herald a newsstand paper in a freeway town was perhaps inevitable.
the national education was proved to be ineffective and inappropriate on account of all these reasons.
error while applying stylesheet.
redistribute handles in segment.
birjand.
if you 'd really rather have a buick do n't leave home without the american express card.
asia/harbin.
couldn't resolve address.
it 's not just a simple investment in a small company  mr. wakui says.
standard moniker factory.
pacific/noumea.
farmer's inability to derive expected benefits from the project s due to project implementing government agency's lack of direct accountability towards the people.
sky blue 2.
unknown object type.
could not remove file.
this will facilitate the further analysis of various aspects of interregional relations in the future.
footbridge, pedestrian bridge.
if true, week numbers are displayed.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 4.
midwesco filter resources inc. initial offering of 830,000 common shares to be offered by the company via chicago corp.
cold bay.
just a blind fear of the unknown is causing them to beg the regulators for protection.
macro call step.
information about.
edit quick mask color.
white square.
destination folder.
unable to change server side privacy settings.
access a network share or resource.
unable to parse item.
the at&t team also is trying to combine their latest superconductor process with  melt-textured growth  a process discovered earlier at bell laboratories.
zigzagline.
we were told to go back to our apartments and remain there until further notice.
with dashain festival around the corner, people's mobility has increased.
characters with spaces.
unlock keyring.
the deficit finance will be reduced from 1.7 percent of the gross domestic product in 1991/92 to less than one percent of gdp by the end of the eight plan.
is offering to send file.
the owner of the file.
school, assignments and household chores usually keep us busy during weekdays.
aspect ratio is unknown.
therefore, it is imperative to develop a time bound educational framework and encourage the private sector involvement in higher education.
send new message to.
the user interface container.
jaguar shares closed at 869 pence up 122 pence on hefty turnover of 9.7 million shares.
florio 's lying  the voice goes on because  the barrel on courter 's land  contained heating oil was cleaned up and caused no pollution.
space which is inserted between cells of an item.
pauline yoshihashi in los angeles contributed to this article.
corporations and museums are among the serious buyers giving greater market stability says robert persky of the photograph collector.
similarly, programmes with higher comparative advantages will be implemented in agriculture, industry, tourism and other sectors.
katowice.
america/araguaina.
africa/mogadishu.
number of colors.
twillingate.
the immense growth in non-food products and services accompanied by the increas e in food and beverage products in 1991/92 caused the price level reach extremely high during this period.
in spite of huge past investment made in this sector, farming still depends, to a large extent, on rainfa11.
unable to read from network.
unit selection.
would you like to send updated meeting information to participants?
aptitude failed.
failed to rename to.
partially configured.
click/drag threshold.
shavian.
estonian.
if set, wrap lines if the text becomes too wide.
in 1989 home purchase plans have ranged monthly from 2.9  to 3.7  of respondents.
in respect of several development activities, the private sector and non-governmental organizations can evidently be more effective in terms of cost, flexibility, motivation and initiative.
to promote regional balance, special grants will be made available during the eighth plan for specific projects on addition to the lump sum government grants to the regions.
confirm force poweroff request.
the king of diamonds.
include a delete command that bypasses trash.
birth year.
axial flow fan.
this plan will in the course of resource allocation, accord priority to such programmes whose completion provides necessary support to another or those which have a high economic benefit.
investors money managers and corporate officials had until today to comment on the proposals and the issue has produced more mail than almost any other issue in memory mr. lane said.
for this- new laws will have to be formulated, and new discipline created.
call.
3174 desktop cluster controller.
revoked.
pencil.
stadiums tend to redistribute existing wealth within a community not create more of it.
he described the situation as  an escrow problem a timing issue  which he said was rapidly rectified with no losses to customers.
black level.
number of colors.
adjust the zoom level.
remove the selected toolbar.
user function.
error writing to image file.
child widget to appear next to the button text.
logo image.
wireless bridge.
vršac.
typical rates in the secondary market : 8.53  one month ; 8.50  three months ; 8.30  six months.
directional light.
bradley a. stertz in detroit contributed to this article.
close.
raise selection one step.
there is no application configured to open this type of file.
old-time kiddies  he says.
mr. trudeau 's attorney norman k. samnick said the harassment consists mainly of the guild 's year-long threats of disciplinary action.
interfaces required.
click to close the curve.
menubar accelerator.
is not installed in the path.
vertical scrollbar policy.
these days he hustles to house-painting jobs in his chevy pickup before and after training with the tropics.
profiler results.
caret mode.
that stake together with its convertible preferred stock holdings gives faulding the right to increase its interest to 70  of moleculon 's voting stock.
in 1989 as often as not the principal fights in the major campaigns are prompted by the ads themselves.
now that the baseball season is officially over you see it's time for a new season to begin.
policy changes and achievements during 1990 1992 the main responsibility of the interim government formed after the restoration of the multiparty system through the historic peopleâ€™s movement of 1990 against the panchayat regime was to concentrate on two things 1.
each clone's size is determined by the picked value in that point.
find objects by the name of an attribute exact or partial match.
unable to stat.
select folder.
run command.
border average.
alternate the sign of opacity change for each column.
this does not sit well with some clerics.
the style of the widget, which contains information about how it will look colors etc.
justify.
in order to avoid the lack if onside data and information necessary for the selection of development programmes at the local level, data will be collected and maintained up-to-date at the district level on a regular basis.
the share of export in gdp stood at 7 percent in 1964/65, which declined to 5.7 percent only on 1989/990.
first image.
the fact that new england proposed lower rate increases 4.8  over seven years against around 5.5  boosts proposed by the other two outside bidders complicated negotiations with state officials mr. ross asserted *t*-1.
halfconfig.
in view if the disappointing state if the per capital income and the increase in poverty, it has become imperative to achieve higher economic growth rate for the amelioration of the standard of living of the common people.
if true, allow applications in the terminal to make text boldface.
he was on the board of an insurance company with financial problems but he insists he made no secret of it.
there's a satisfaction in going against the rules  offers will mcenaney once a stopper with cincinnati's big red machine.
couldn't read ellipse info.
preview the message to be printed.
openoffice.org spreadsheet template.
retrieving pop message.
keyboard shortcuts.
gimpressionist defaults.
whirl and pinch.
theme name.
show status icon.
ginnie mae 's 9  issue for november delivery finished at 98 5/8 up 2/32 and its 9 1/2  issue at 100 22/32 also up 2/32.
the starting angle of the first brush to create.
if congress does nothing president bush will have won.
the server you are trying to connect to is not known.
it will also help for the development of instructional programme.
get the short doc string for a key.
jonesboro.
filename is not absolute.
the gtkadjustment for the horizontal position.
r. gordon mcgovern was forced out as campbell soup co. 's president and chief executive officer the strongest evidence yet of the power that dorrance family members intend to wield in reshaping the troubled food company.
mrs.
dow jones industrials 2645.90 up 0.82 ; transportation 1206.26 up 1.25 ; utilities 220.45 up 1.26.
manitowoc.
warning failed to parse string value '.
failed to write folder index.
asked whether potential advertisers will be scared away by the magazine 's direct policy ms. poore replies :  i do n't know and i do n't care.
one the transport front, although some roads were constructed in the past years, there are still no link roads to some district headquarters.
merge.
milk river.
geolocation.
tabriz.
if available vertical space is bigger than needed for the child, how much of it to use for the child. 0.0 means none, 1.0 means all.
monday.
font description as a string.
virtual.
error while parsing in line.
smoothing.
whether to show a sort indicator.
menu bar accelerator.
actually the long deterioration in daily newspapers shows signs of coming to an end and the industry looks pretty healthy.
approximate equivalents.
barbacena.
names of the workspaces deprecated.
aborting install.
cursor blink.
sparkling.
move center to.
malformed expression.
reduce image to pure red, green, and blue.
full screen.
inefficient investment portfolio : cost-benefit rations, and other criteria criteria which measure the economic and social benefits of projects were neglected in the coruse of selecting projects to be implemented in various sectors and sub-sectors.
convert the image to the rgb working space ?
free listening of all songs.
latin1 supplement.
it may be some times imperceptible but no less harmful.
patterson.
fonts this may take a while.
create rectangles and squares.
enter password for keyring to unlock.
configuration error  unknown item notify administrator.
you have received a special message from.
blowing sprays.
devhelp.
sun rasterfile.
it does n't make any difference now.
classname.
andrew toolkit inset.
click ok to finish.
ibm the world leader in computers did n't offer its first pc until august 1981 as many other companies entered the market.
john d. carney 45 was named to succeed mr. hatch as president of eastern edison.
server challenge too long 2048 octets.
reset color.
educating student doesn’t only mean to teach each and every line of textbooks and solve mathematical problems.
sound  video.
show active processes.
objects to design jackson diagrams.
supported files.
help.
font name.
dividend growth on the order of 12  is expected by both mr. coxon of cigna and mr. einhorn of goldman sachs.
whether or not to fall back on threading by subjects when the messages do not contain inreplyto or references headers.
ignored far too long path.
haskell source code.
pontecagnano.
moving ideas and information is more difficult and will require a great deal of innovations.
zoom image when window size changes.
remove transformations from object.
in consequence of the distorted ad hoc economic policies of thirty years interspersed with hollow slogans of disappointing development resumts and programmes without achievements, the country had to bear several economic distortions which were as follows.
main options.
pressure unit.
the council backed the audit commission 's stand that the swap transactions are illegal.
title to display for the terminal window or tab. this title may be replaced by or combined with the title set by the application inside the terminal, depending on the titlemode setting.
some of these preferences are locked down.
gimp pattern.
any reading below 50  suggests the manufacturing sector is generally declining.
on the local list is inside the group but not on the server list. do you want this buddy to be added?
used.
do again the last undone action.
mail server.
by the end of 1989/90, the total generation capacity including hydro and diesel in the country was 227.084 mw. while about 1 percent of the total population had access to electricity in 1960/61, 8.8 percent of the population could enjoy this facility by the end of 1989/90.
subdivide.
an error occurred while opening a directory in the file manager.
arbitrage-related trading during the session was confined largely to a round of buy programs near the close which helped offset the impact of profit-taking among blue chips.
second flares paint options.
what do you like to make yourselves?
can't load font.
no matching password file entry in.
prompt when user tries to send a message with no to or cc recipients.
error closing find's pipe.
only allow remote users to view the desktop.
distance in pixels the pointer must move before accelerated mouse motion is activated. a value of 1 is the system default.
abbeville.
format used mostly in europe.
marcus bains line.
do not sign meeting requests for outlook compatibility.
nothing to redo.
please check that a disc is present in the drive.
dreamcast rom.
shiny.
mr. neuberger realized that although of italian ancestry mr. mariotta still could qualify as a minority person since he was born in puerto rico.
abū mūsā.
increase the speed of the animation.
title case.
europe/rome.
nuclear or atomic energy started replacing these conventional sources of energy after the second world war.
maximum possible value for y.
extracting templates from packages.
next.
1 industry : the industrial production index increased by 29 percent (1986/87=100) in the fiscal year 1990/91.
version.
flowing.
multimedia menu.
print size.
the selection of strategies and priorities, too, reflected similar drawbacks and in spite of the considerable investment made during the period, no desired progress was achieved.
bezierline.
that command doesn't work on this protocol.
when a new conversation is opened this plugin will insert the last conversation into the current conversation.
cost-effective index funds just are n't sexy enough to justify the high fees and commissions that retail customers frequently pay and that institutional customers refuse to pay.
select a region to grab.
number every.
cannot read footer from.
during the plan period, an effective monitoring and evaluation system will be devised and institutionalized, which will not only ensure the timely implementation of projects but also encourage management accountability and performance oriented evaluation system in the public sector.
active controllers.
earlton.
sinus rendering.
if an elementary machinery lick water million, diesel engine and biogas plants could be developed in the rural areas, it will contribute immensely to the development of food processing industries and cottage industries.
gnome's greatest strength is our strong community. virtually anyone, with or without coding skills, can contribute to making gnome better.
could not lock temporary file.
replicate gradient segment.
montego bay.
we 're coming closer to achieving the stated objective of slowing the economy to a point where hopefully some downward trend in prices will occur  said mr. guffey.
los angeles.
message.
you are trying to save the file on a readonly disk. please check that you typed the location correctly and try again.
keep sign of result one direction only.
shortcut.
modes.
the house voted to boost the federal minimum wage for the first time since early 1981 casting a solid 382-37 vote for a compromise measure backed by president bush.
couldn't revoke subkey.
failed to add the cd.
class group.
shared library.
they devised a 69-point scale awarding one point for each subskill measured on the cat test to rate the closeness of test preparatives to the fifth-grade cat.
error getting metainfo.
savoonga.
the government has accordingly constituted a high level administration reform commission and a process has been initiated for the implementation of the commission's recommendations.
two firms were expelled from the nasd three were suspended or barred and nine were fined.
dow jones & co. said it extended its $ 18-a-share offer for telerate inc. common stock until 5 p.m. est nov. 9.
add files to the specified archive and quit the program.
show right margin.
default map type.
conflicts.
make surroundings transparent.
during the plan period, the above economic growth rate will be achieved by increasing productivity, by exercising greater discipline in government expenditure, and by implementing policy reforms which will attract the private sector investment in the fields of industry, trade, finance and sp on.
recipient unavailable.
preprocessor.
group selected objects.
network history.
europe/brussels.
whether the language should be hidden from the user.
the large number of leakage in the nuclear plants took many lives, environmental hazards apart.
i though that the rain would cease by the time school dismissed.
get list.
interactive console for scriptfu development.
ps of new hampshire shares closed yesterday at $ 3.75 off 25 cents in new york stock exchange composite trading.
did not understand fill type for element.
jerome j. jahn executive vice president and chief financial officer said mr. rubendall was resigning by  mutual agreement  with the board.
icons only.
link properties.
wrote records with missing files.
newlines prohibited in updatealternatives files.
colorifying.
fit to window.
subsequently, there were continued efforts from 1961/62 to install panchayat system and as that year was taken as the base year for the second plan 19621965 also, the same year i.e. 1961/62 has been taken as the initial year for comparative studies.
flexible image transport system.
bulgaria.
transparent.
default component viewer application.
but it is particularly difficult this autumn because of low water levels on the mississippi river on which flows much of the u.s. corn that is shipped overseas.
dillon.
commonwealth edison said it is already appealing the underlying commission order and is considering appealing judge curry 's order.
shutdown error.
the type of this sunrasterfile is not supported.
add scheme.
cannot attach cms signed data.
erosion can cause much human suffering.
sales of medium-sized cars which benefited from price reductions arising from introduction of the consumption tax more than doubled to 30,841 units from 13,056 in october 1988.
scanning new messages.
reset the active curve.
monte carlo.
mr. reupke 52 years old and a 27-year reuters veteran had been the information-services company 's general manager for only six months.
color dithering.
contents.
useful programmes such as the national development service programmes were put off for political reasons.
failed to execute gpg.
3 mb.
time zone.
crockett.
list view.
open preferences for the zoom tool.
in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday nbi common closed at 93 cents a share up 31 cents.
channel public keys list.
this conference has been closed. no more messages can be sent.
save a copy of the image.
in short, leading a healthy lifestyle is a conscious decision.
programs for internet access such as web and email.
wireless location appliance.
bell based in los angeles makes and distributes electronic computer and building products.
would you like to save your changes to this memo?
messages with attachments.
russian.
zhejiang.
undefined condition.
suggests.
longstaggered.
texinfo document.
can default.
fulton.
i'm not going to look stupid  vows former pittsburgh pirate second baseman rennie stennett sweat dotting his brow as he prepares for some practice swings.
calendar view for a month.
error accessing.
in the u.s. over-the-counter market jaguar shares trading as american depositary receipts closed at $ 13.625 up $ 1.75.
must be at least 5 characters long.
background.
choose another application with which to open the selected item.
it is a very bad work.
groupwise work screen name 1.
defense confidential.
show layer boundary.
it is estimated that government agencies will be able to supply a total of 15,850 million cubic feet of timber of different types during the plan period.
default background.
unknown.
title.
installed packages.
the total marks the sixth consecutive monthly decline.
22nd.
but says the general manager of a network affiliate in the midwest  i think if i tell them i need more time they 'll take  cosby ' across the street  viacom 's move comes as the syndication market is being flooded with situation comedies that are still running on the networks.
tokyu group mitsubishi estate and bridgestone/firestone which advanced tuesday declined on profit-taking.
amount to indent the paragraph, in pixels.
thousands of east germans fled to czechoslovakia after the east berlin government lifted travel restrictions.
failed to parse gpg passphrase request.
match whole word.
failed to change mailbox owner.
macro-economic stabilization the expansionary policy adopted in the past has given rise to excessive liquidity, increasing money supply, increasing trade imbalance and high price rise.
lar.
thus, though there was a considerable increase in foreign currency reserves during this period, development of a regular and sustainable source of foreign exchange increased due to excessive flow if foreign loan and grants and as these are not reliable sources, a situation persisted where there was the possibility of drastic reduction of the reserves.
rename.
thiruvananthapuram.
office workers and school children were left stranded.
deleted layer.
the voice of america is a government agency that broadcasts news and views some might say propaganda in 43 languages to 130 million listeners around the world.
very dark gray.
cannot open package hierarchy file.
the following packages have unmet dependencies.
school officials and prosecutors say mrs. yeargin is lying.
lubbock.
aifc audio.
trace the given number of reduced colors.
whether to enable debug for the playback engine.
personal.
a massive amount of water flowing from one place to another is a river.
now mr. broberg a lawyer claims he'd play for free.
since these bodies were directed by both the concerned ministries and local administration, a state of confusion prevailed in their work performance.
start a new gimp instance.
this is not supposed to happen please file a bug report.
normally open contact horizontal.
switch symbol.
ask for confirmation when deleting items.
morocco.
why are we blacks continually defined by our minority and the lowest common denominator.
and unlike a few years ago you do n't even have to worry whether the ad is truthful.
today a banker is worrying about local regional and money-center -lcb- banks -rcb- as well as thrifts and credit unions  says ms. moore at synergistics research.
rename layer.
restart the game.
versions will be shown.
thus, while the foreign exchange reserve in mid july, 1990, was just sufficient to cover 7.6 months of imports, the reserve grew sufficiently to cover 9.9 months of imports by mid july 1991.
you must specify a folder.
specify the output file instead of standard output.
purge.
traditionally the card has been used mainly for travel and entertainment expenses.
time scale.
soon t-shirts appeared in the corridors that carried the school 's familiar red-and-white ghs logo on the front.
and some investment bankers say a restructuring is n't feasible while the sec still is scrutinizing mr. spiegel 's past junk-bond trades.
the multilevel railcars scheduled for delivery in 1990 will be made *-1 by thrall manufacturing co. a chicago heights ill. division of closely held duchossois industries inc. elmhurst ill.
hannover.
i decided to walk in the rain.
search.
enable echo by word.
no selection to convert.
object not found in storage.
africa/casablanca.
follow up.
seward.
asia/jakarta.
center.
failed to add data to cms encoder.
connection details.
campina grande.
she adds that legislation curbing it would be  a darned good idea.
valve, vertical.
judie macdonald vice president of retail sales at barnett banks inc. of jacksonville fla. says the company now targets sub-segments within the market by tailoring its popular seniors partners program to various life styles.
longville.
normal.
a s the returns from investment take long time to materialize, the policy reforms and the structural changes in the eighth plan are confidently expected to increase the workperformance of the economy particularly in the later years of the plan and thereafter.
start time.
he succeeds terrence d. daniels formerly a w.r. grace vice chairman who resigned.
font  colors.
$ 10 billion of 10-year notes to be auctioned wednesday and to mature nov. 15 1999.
section.
coordinate expression contained unknown operator at the start of this text.
a person is strong, active, energetic and intelligent in his youth.
24 bpp, 1bit alpha, no palette.
tacna.
select all objects or all nodes.
outgoing.
stream error.
horizontal pane position.
whirl and pinch.
photoshop image.
create a colormap using a gradient from the gradient editor.
fairbanks.
open a file selector to browse your folders.
howard mosher president and chief executive officer said he anticipates growth for the luxury auto maker in britain and europe and in far eastern markets.
namespace.
kill devil hills.
relative link.
/buddies/add group.
requiring the installation of version.
while vichy collaborated with the germans during world war ii in the deaths of thousands of resistance fighters and jews its officials needed a diversionary symbolic traitor.
moves flat review to the bottom left.
the host could not be found.
in particular mr. coxon says businesses are paying out a smaller percentage of their profits and cash flow in the form of dividends than they have historically.
badge reader.
the country has not been able to derive potential benefits from the investment made in the health sector as well.
portgentil.
nothing selected.
detach detach this session.
this image depth is not supported.
general activation error with no description.
interface statistics.
gstreamer pipeline.
the index of the current page.
in 1962- 63, the first year of the plan, rs 70 million were spent.
the â€˜basic needsâ€™ programme announced in dec./jan/ 1985 became the principal slogan and priority of the seventh plan.
a nickname for measures to stop the market from plunging too far too fast.
show visual effects when playing an audio only file.
error getting schema at.
applications that did not fit in other categories.
click to add control points to all channels.
desaturate.
could not start the gimp help browser plugin.
table cell.
south korea registered a trade deficit of $ 101 million in october reflecting the country 's economic sluggishness according to government figures released wednesday.
track  mute.
cape dyer.
adjust color levels.
icon.
they blamed increased demand for dairy products at a time of exceptionally high u.s. exports of dry milk coupled with very low import quotas.
replace.
caps lock.
mecklenburgwestern pomerania.
the ten of diamonds.
add the folder to the bookmarks.
classic.
each of the survey 's indicators gauges the difference between the number of purchasers reporting improvement in a particular area and the number reporting a worsening.
seek to /.
the reduced dividend is payable jan. 2 to stock of record dec. 15.
in order to effectively and appropriately implement the above mentioned policies, it is necessary to increase the work-efficiency of the government administrative machinery and to achieve the active participation of the private sector.
search podcast episodes.
both newsweek and u.s. news have been gaining circulation in recent years without heavy use of electronic giveaways to subscribers such as telephones or watches.
pacific/auckland.
the sec has historically paid obeisance to the ideal of a level playing field  wrote clyde s. mcgregor of winnetka ill. in one of the 92 letters the agency has received since the changes were proposed aug. 17.
camden.
are you sure you want to close evolution?
pacific/tongatapu.
dealers led the market wednesday by actively trading for their own accounts observers said.
can't read color entries.
also observed are the costs per hectare of projects constructed with the participate on of farmers to be ranging from re. 8,000 to rs 25,000.
the complications in the export of traditional and some new kinds of manufactured goods and the quantitative decline in the agricultural products have contributed to the narrowing of the agricultural products have contributed to the narrowing of the export base of nepal.
language section.
wrap mode.
inquiry clears texas judge of bias in comments on homosexual murder victims.
encapsulated postscript image.
creating preview.
panel.
no text is allowed inside element.
disconnect all.
error getting default value for '.
it 's a shame their meeting never took place.
character table.
color picker information.
the private sector as well as foreign investors will be particularly encouraged through appropriate policy measures to invest in the industrial sector.
the white house said the shipboard meetings next month between bush and soviet leader gorbachev will take place in the waters off malta.
many people keep their caste, creed or religion above their nationalism.
park rapids.
the number of pixels in the table border.
the following new packages will be installed.
remove useless trailing spaces in your file.
interpublic is providing the programming in return for advertising time which it said will be valued at more than $ 75 million in 1990 and $ 150 million in 1991.
new managers would think a little more like wall street  mr. mcmillin added.
about memory.
could not write to a file using the audio profile.
it is important to recognize that a healthy living ensures a longer life span as well as a life free of disease and complications.
move to workspace up.
adjust the spike length.
vertical alignment.
usx announced in october that it was soliciting bids to sell txo 's oil and gas reserves.
bucket fill tool fill selected area with a color or pattern.
stretch contrast.
accordingly, the available statistics shows that 5,424, 000 and 1,134,000 residents of the rural and urban areas respectively had access to the drinking water facility.
thief river falls.
unable to find an archive for the package.
movies.
there should be a file calledplease check your installation.
lines.
nothing to undo.
move according to transform.
exit action.
so would the little tramp for that matter.
using distinguished name dn.
the coleman counterattack featured a close-up of a young woman in shadows and the ad suggested that she was recalling an unpleasant courtroom ordeal.
hiroshi asadain reference to your oct. 9 page-one article  barbara bush earns even higher ratings than the president  it is regrettable that you must continually define blacks by our negatives :  among liberals 60  have positive views of her while 50  approve of the president 's job performance.
play count.
grains and soybeans : prices closed mostly higher in relatively light trading as farmers continued to withhold their crops from the marketplace in the hope of higher prices to come.
many investors certainly believe a bidding war is imminent.
unknown pixel mode.
unable to locate package.
nebraska.
is greater than.
this will lead to a considerable increase in agricultural productivity as well as a decrease in foreign currency expenditure for the import of diesel.
trade and industry secretary nicholas ridley told the house of commons yesterday that he will relinquish the government 's so-called golden share in the company as long as jaguar shareholders agree.
colorize tool colorize the image.
create an image of a textured sphere.
width in characters.
minimum possible value for y.
cisco  misc.
specifies the height of the log viewer main window in pixels.
the year 1960/61 has been taken as the base for the analysis if those sectors where the 1961/62 data were not available.
while the current account had increased to rs. 10,254.9 million in f.y. 1990/91, it reduced to rs. 9,578.1 in f.y. 1991/92.
a beijing food-shop assistant has become the first mainland chinese to get aids through sex the people 's daily said.
removing color.
it is not supported by the text or history of the constitution.
the industrialization, in the process of value added contributes, to the creation of new employment opportunities and economic integration.
move waste to stock.
send  receive mail.
adjust letter spacing.
enter an alias for this contact.
expected bool, got.
ford began installing the rear-seat belts in trucks with its f-series crew cab pickups in the 1989 model year.
failed to parse gpg userid hint.
the discussions were disclosed as the bank holding company said that it has dropped its longstanding opposition to full interstate banking bills in connecticut and in massachusetts.
do you wish to save your changes?
integrator  input left.
list overflow.
even the un-burnt gas released in a heating process pollutes the environment.
unalakleet.
the superdome is an exercise in optimism a statement of faith  he has said.
no paths to break apart in the selection.
importing pine data.
couldn't find any package matching and more than 40 packages contain in their description.
under these trying conditions, too, the great expectations and enthusiasm obtaining among the people can serve as a primary source of energy for the process of economic modernization.
a diagram created with the program dia.
not installed configuration files remain.
audio disc.
except where noted none of these people could be reached for comment or had any comment.
in addition to the damages the suit seeks a court order preventing the guild from punishing or retaliating against mr. trudeau.
hue rotation.
it does not deal with qualitative phenomena and individuals.
cursor blink time.
the pixbuf to render.
these studies have estimated that 40-60 percent of the populations are living below the absolute poverty line.
elsewhere : in japan the benchmark no. 111 4.6  issue due 1998 ended on brokers screens unchanged at 95.09 to yield 5.435.
caldor based in norwalk conn. operates 118 stores in the northeast ; it reported revenue of $ 1.6 billion last year.
active object.
warning about too many flags.
repeat the last search.
undelete message.
in the past, the minimum age to vote was twenty one years.
markey said we could have done this in public  because so little sensitive information was disclosed the aide said.
universal access.
applications.
magnetic disk.
sets the preview size used for layers and channel previews in newly created dialogs.
compressed icons are not supported.
increase.
no proxy.
the initial position of the window.
add.
continue process if stopped.
it is generally expected to be the usual 10-year four billion mark issue.
destripe.
securities firms are among the biggest issuers of commercial paper or short-term corporate ious which they sell to finance their daily operations.
sarajevo.
current layer.
cannot delete!! there must be at least one gflare.
has retroactively denied your request to add them to your list.
that builds confidence self sufficiency not to mention critical regulatory net worth.
bluetooth.
name of the gtk input method preedit style used by gtk.
no contacts.
the current element  cannot contain text.
maximize horizontally.
an unknown person.
session management.
for stock indexes the underlying investment may be a stock-index futures contract or the cash value of a stock index.
move.
specified layer not found.
dispose.
identifier.
selected pixels only.
check.
potosí.
latvia.
make the window have a fixed position in the viewport.
volume on the first section was estimated at 900 million shares up from 582 million shares monday.
setext document.
hangup.
move to folder.
archive type not supported.
slashed.
calendar.
file server.
keep the following packages at their current version.
forwarded message.
box outline.
getting message of.
double click to open items.
switch to fullscreen.
graphics applications.
ringers memorize patterns of changes known as  methods  which have odd-sounding names like kent treble bob major or grandsire caters.
this option will connect to the pop server using a plaintext password. this is the only option supported by many pop servers.
source 2.
mark as junk.
directional.
click to clone.
preface.
the following are not saved.
as shown in table 4, of the total development outlay of 113,479 million, social services and agriculture, irrigation and forestry sectors will receive a higher share of the total development outlay (31.5 and 25.7 percent respectively) followed by electricity (20.9 percent) and transport and communications (17.7 percent).
enable debugging code.
radius 2.
sibiu.
reset saved input device settings to default values.
erode.
cannot create temporary save directory.
attendees list.
could not open converter from to.
open with tree view.
he added  this has nothing to do with marty ackerman and it is not designed particularly to take the company private.
although there are ample natural resources available there is the lacking of the human resources to exploit these resources systematically.
configure input devices.
moves flat review to the end position.
scissors select tool select shapes using intelligent edgefitting.
user interface/fonts.
edit message.
documents/spreadsheet.
the message's date will be compared against a time relative to when filtering occurs.
specify a configuration source to use rather than the default path.
please enter a valid network address and try again.
the white house said mr. bush decided to grant duty-free status for 18 categories but turned down such treatment for other types of watches  because of the potential for material injury to watch producers located in the u.s. and the virgin islands.
terminal application.
create destination folder without asking confirmation.
asia/calcutta.
analysts calculate cray computer 's initial book value at about $ 4.75 a share.
by help.
could not capture using the audio profile.
ping.
they have begun sending letters explaining the program which began oct. 18 and will end dec. 18 to about five million card holders.
second flares.
number nodes.
paint mode.
edit the stops of the gradient.
the dow jones equity market index gained 0.99 to 319.75 and the new york stock exchange composite index went up 0.60 to 188.84.
in such areas, the emphasis will mainly be laid on cereal production.
america/godthab.
looping links encountered.
flip horizontal.
since nearly 90 percent of the population live in rural areas, the plan has laid special emphasis on generating greater employment opportunities in rural areas.
the padding to insert at the right of the widget.
j.l. henry & co. miami and a principal of the firm henry i. otero of miami were jointly fined $ 30,000 and expelled for alleged improper use of a customer 's funds among other things.
the program-trading issue is heating up on capitol hill as it is on wall street and several legislators want to grant the sec the power to shut off the programs when trading becomes too volatile.
duplicate endpaths.
file is truncated in line.
lsi logic corp. reported a surprise $ 35.7 million third-quarter net loss including a special restructuring charge that reflects a continuing industry-wide slowdown in semiconductor demand.
y resolution.
d.
following its introduction, the commercial banks have begun foreign exchange transactions at open market exchange rate for payments to these sectors.
certificates of deposit : 8.07  one month ; 8.06  two months ; 8.04  three months ; 7.95  six months ; 7.88  one year.
for a funny thing happened on the way to the ruling : the united states information agency which runs the voice changed its position on three key points.
sales of new cars in europe fell 4.2  in september from a year earlier and analysts say the market could continue to soften in the months ahead.
enable spell checker.
new contact list.
different fiscal years have been taken as base years in the preparation of the foregoing chapter.
device information.
gnome terminal.
mr. hahn the 62-year-old chairman and chief executive officer of georgia-pacific corp. is leading the forest-product concern 's unsolicited $ 3.19 billion bid for great northern nekoosa corp.
young 's market co. a wholesaler of spirits wines and other goods said it will merge with a new corporation formed by the underwood family which controls young 's.
birthday.
checking for new mail.
image pixel data corrupt.
winstonsalem.
reliance on foreign assistance without any concrete plan and without paying due attention to the optimum utilization of the assistance during the thirty years of the panchayat regime has given rise to many undesirable consequences placing the country unde3r the burden of foreign debts.
source : telerate systems inc.
save icon.
multipurpose projects of national importance.
'if not' normally closed ladder contact.
if set, an underline in the label property indicates that the next character should be used for the mnemonic accelerator key in the overflow menu.
preserved.
remove when conversation window gains focus.
various development and construction works help to fulfill the basic needs.
the 12  notes due 1995 fell 9/32 to 103 3/8 to yield 11.10.
middlesex water co. offering of 150,000 shares of common stock via legg mason wood walker inc. and howard weil labouisse friedrichs inc.
out of the total students of the primary class of the age group 6 to 10, 182,533 had attended their classes in 1961 and this work out to be 14.4 percent of that age group.
río grande.
reading package lists.
international non-governmental organizations have been playing a significant role over the pats several years in the development functions in nepal.
recipient.
12th.
number height.
speech document.
logo background color.
a computer using the more-advanced intel corp. 386 microprocessor with four megabytes of memory and a 100-megabyte hard disk now sells for $ 5,699 down from $ 6,799.
filename of a background image.
could not add a bookmark.
in regex  backreferences are not supported.
evolution restore.
error trying to save figure as a parasite can't attach parasite to drawable.
path in which to look for installed files.
1ormany.
couldn't read source list.
import options.
pasco.
revert unsaved changes to document ?
quit any running devhelp.
pinned packages.
set name from text.
font scale.
widget not found.
orenburg.
the rest went to investors from france and hong kong.
what will happen to dividend growth next year ?
land also provided man with a number of metals.
oberpfaffenhofen.
dollar-yen -lcb- trade -rcb- is the driving force in the market  said tom trettien a vice president with banque paribas in new york  but i 'm not convinced it will continue.
dial turn left.
unknown volume.
urgent condition on socket.
to pick a color.
folders.
need an action option.
pixbuf for closed expander.
although this growth rate would seem ambitious in the light of past experiences, it will be possible to achieve the above mentioned growth rate in the new political and economic environment.
server statistics.
color scheme files.
these rate indications aren't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location.
element is not allowed inside current element.
forbid the candidate version of the selected package from being installed newer versions of the package will be installed as usual.
factory defaults.
that year the apple ii commodore pet and tandy trs-80 came to market.
the printer “” is low on toner.
native format.
are you sure you want to permanently delete ?
an error occurred while creating a new file.
varna.
fake menu item.
xfig vector graphic.
delete completed tasks.
the inner ear has two organs—one for hearing and the other for balance.
john r. stevens 49 years old was named senior executive vice president and chief operating officer both new positions.
the pennsylvania bank agreed to be acquired in a merger with univest corp. of pennsylvania for $ 25.50 a share.
website url.
author entry.
unable to mount the selected volume. the volume is probably in a format that cannot be mounted.
universal gateway.
a horizontal scrolling version of the buddy list.
program name.
you have mail.
too many groups.
print the value of a key to standard output.
he must get up before six to see it.
spike thickness.
the newly fattened premiums reflect the increasingly global marketing of some country funds mr. porter suggests.
title.
could not open help directory.
change keyring password.
active network services.
poços de caldas.
document frame.
many colleagues are angry at mrs. yeargin.
the $ 2.5 billion byron 1 plant near rockford ill. was completed in 1985.
dash pattern.
a good citizen must take interest in the welfare of his neighbours.
pcf font.
text information options.
indent set.
while forest development works in the hill and terai were being undertaken through a total of 22 forest divisions and 7 circle offices in 1965, forest offices in all the 75 districts, regional offices in all the regions and more than 200 ranger offices were set up by the year 1990.
new search folder.
unable to find any calendars.
västerås.
create a dynamic offset object linked to the original path.
starting extensions.
/tools/privacy.
multiple selected objects have the same fill.
background.
medicine lodge.
the question is whether his only means of defense is the veto.
moisture extractor.
previously it offered $ 13.65 a share in cash or $ 29 million.
gnome app libdir.
similarly, a policy was introduced to gradually phase out the quantitative restrictions on imports and adjust them through customs tariff.
staggered.
while the average life span of a nepali citizen was 28 years in 1961, this increased to 53 by fy 1989/90.
server too busy.
the move is part of a strategy to focus on its core metals trading processing and plant engineering activities while shedding peripheral units the company said.
but several teachers also say the incident casts doubt on the wisdom of evaluating teachers or schools by using standardized test scores.
whether the sidebar should be visible.
make stroke opaque.
disallow.
11th.
meriden.
sublimate.
convolve.
swatches.
show calendar options.
damming a river can also cause problems.
java byte code.
mrs. ward took over in 1986 becoming the school 's seventh principal in 15 years.
text subtitles.
the individual must be made to choose the law and order path.
couldn't allocate memory for line data.
the artist hangs out in greenwich village on a strip of sixth avenue populated by jugglers magicians and other good-natured hustlers.
bad colormap.
mr. van dover added that researchers are trying to determine precisely what crystal changes solved the problem.
ardmore.
nassau.
pin the toolbar open.
extract to.
tabseparated text document.
5 mb.
the st. louis company earned $ 45.2 million or 65 cents a share compared with $ 84.9 million or $ 1.24 a share a year earlier.
email address to which the remote desktop url should be sent.
the present government now has to undertake the responsibility of achieving the economic disorder and distortions of the past.
repeat mode.
there are no snippets selected to be exported.
the jack of hearts.
closing the last view exits the program.
u.s. trade negotiators argue that countries with inadequate protections for intellectual-property rights could be hurting themselves by discouraging their own scientists and authors and by deterring u.s. high-technology firms from investing or marketing their best products there.
africa/ceuta.
these methods relate to the collection, presentation, analysis and interpretation of data.
operation not allowed without configuration server.
the country has not been able to derive potential benefits from the investment made in the health sector as well.
couldn't communicate with.
sales rose to $ 3 million *u* from $ 2.9 million.
the foreground color of the grid.
this understanding with india had a positive impact the year on the country's economic activities.
not enough memory to load image.
toggle maximization state.
orphaned clone.
mae hong son.
/conversation/send file.
save image map.
long beach.
cannot move file to trash, do you want to delete permanently?
sooner or later when the forests have gone the climate will change from not and humid to dry.
thus, according to an estimate, by the end of f.y. 1991/92, 6,699,000 people 39 percent in the rural sector and 1,172,000 people in the urban areas 66 percent, a total of 7,871,000 people would have has access to drinking water facilities.
asia/hovd.
save curve points to file.
binghamton.
assembly source code.
unknown size.
gas, and bitumen etc.
i ate the two slices of buttered toast mother had made fro me and drank a glass of chocolate milk.
horizontal alignment for child.
you have made no changes, update the editor?
failure instantiating main window.
last updated.
terra nova.
there are three fundamental grounds for the proposed investment  pattern.
pine river.
width of the main window in pixels.
protocol translator.
asia/makassar.
fatal parse error in pattern file  unknown pattern format version.
maybe they're not in a chat?
playlist.
aklavik.
it was one of the deadliest attacks on foreign workers in the capital.
the xalign.
process name.
select foreground color.
in china a great number of workers are engaged in pulling out the male organs of rice plants using tweezers and one-third of rice produced in that country is grown from hybrid seeds.
generic processor.
thus, compared to the seventh plan, investment during the eighth plan period will have to be increased by 10.6 percent per annum.
light snow grains.
new password.
simulate distortion caused by square glass tiles.
hearst said it would provide employees with a placement service and pay them for 60 days.
as a result, the ration of current account deficit and gdp increased intensely.
half head.
cell background color as a string.
there is always a chance of recession  added mr. guffey  but if you ask me to put a percentage on it i would think it 's well below a 50  chance.
northway.
edit text files.
scriptfu file selection.
keyboard shortcut to toggle full screen mode.
randomize centers in both dimensions.
type the characters above.
whether to show role field in the event/task/meeting editor.
attachment reminder.
cannot create new defaults file.
invisible.
the other has opposed a woman 's right to choose.
permit user.
the following packages are recommended but will not be installed.
terrace.
default width.
plainview.
selects a random direction of each stroke.
select transparent areas.
release.
deafness is not at once obvious and so may be mistaken for stupidity.
until congress acts the government has n't any authority to issue new debt obligations of any kind the treasury said.
perform arithmetic, scientific or financial calculations.
he appears to be in it for the long haul.
one survey says that of the 100,000 trained bellringers in england today only 40,000 of them still ring.
some say anthony cheetham head of a recently acquired british company century hutchinson could be chosen.
search all shapes.
bluefield.
snap to ticks.
couldn't read playlist.
emboss.
therefore, this plan has placed special emphasis on the awareness creation programmes to increase in the demand for family planning devices.
end event  error.
sum, subtracting right input.
rms distributes electronic devices and produces power supplies and plastic literature displays.
create folder.
remote keys containing.
switch to tab 11.
cabin fires are equally dangerous.
ardabil.
despite policypronouncements and efforts in the previous plans, disparities between rural and urban areas and among development regions have increased.
show the switch user button.
create stars and polygons.
current alpha.
if those words were n't there the nice people at the voice would be able to send you the information or at the very least let you photocopy it.
the printer “” can’t be used, because required software is missing.
cruel.
undo.
south africa.
the teacher must do some talking, but children are encouraged to talk too, to ask questions and to discuss.
permanently remove this folder.
save as.
failed to load the requested file.
if you were a short-term investor you might be more leery about program trading.
totem is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty without even the implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. see the gnu general public license for more details.
america/belize.
set 's modes to.
these evils spread from country to country by imitation through international media publicity.
unable to establish service.
apply active gradient to final image.
a structural analysis of the revenue reveals that it depended entirely upon traditional sources of revenue, as new revenue sources were not tapped.
to my relief, i spotted an empty place at one of the long tables.
in a development system that encompasses the majority of the population, a greater numger of producers including the marginal ones can have access to the increased rural income.
golden.
view help for this game.
unrecognized input. enter either or.
reshuffle cards.
while village level bodies will be accountable to the district level bodies, they in turn, will be accountable to the centre.
the receptivity's font size.
choose difficulty level.
cray computer will be a concept stock  he said.
also in beirut a moslem group vowed to kill americans if the u.s. implements a policy to seize suspects abroad.
brightness.
option given twice for the same window.
morristown.
nesting level.
people have grown tired of these ads and coleman has gotten the stigma of being a negative campaigner  says mark rozell a political scientist at mary washington college.
florin.
other, control.
but as duke university law professor william van alstyne notes by this reasoning a defendant could be held liable in new york for a bad apple even if he sold all his apples in california.
notify for.
floatingpoint.
cursor left.
is not an official debian package, cannot display its changelog.
many investors wrote asking the sec to require insiders to report their purchases and sales immediately not a month later.
scanning.
play a sound for incoming messages.
longview.
failed to connect to pop server in secure mode.
bricks : an estimated requirement of 8,800 million bricks for the eighth plan is exp ected to be met by the production of the industries in the public as well as private sectors.
purge.
the companies said dow elanco will be the largest research-based agricultural concern in north america with projected first-year revenue of $ 1.5 billion.
priority will be given to the installation of shallow tubewell s in areas where shallow aquifers exist.
the university should introduce more programs that allow cultural and religious mixing and understanding of the other.
select objects to paste size to.
style scheme.
engel's.
current transducer.
there is no good security system in the country.
the report from the fed found that manufacturing in particular has been weak in recent weeks.
in separate floor action the house waived budget restrictions and gave quick approval to $ 3.18 billion in supplemental appropriations for law enforcement and anti-drug programs in fiscal 1990.
the hydroelectricity and irrigation facilities need to be expanded through necessary arrangements of means and resources for the maximum utilization of hydro power.
failed to join buddy in chat.
electricity is the greatest gift of science to mankind.
sound selection.
color mode.
the rate of productivity went up by 7.9 percent.
while space bar is pressed.
guaranteed minimum 6.
second.
greater than or equal to.
boa vista.
icons.
malformed signature.
but a 1948 law barred the  dissemination  of that material in the u.s.
transferring data from scanner/camera.
computers have become an important and indispensable feature of our lives.
movies.
saving has been disabled by the system administrator.
play and organize your music collection.
no password entry for 'root'.
while teacher-student ration was 1:25 at the primary class (class 1- 3) level in 1961, it increased to 1:39 by april 1990.
property is read only.
direct.
partial character sequence at end of input.
whether the toolbar should be visible.
this adversely affected the environment as well as the climate of the country.
personal title.
close window.
could not perform key agreement for file transfer.
the event mask that decides what kind of gdkevents this widget gets.
new bedford.
nipawin.
later yesterday a massachusetts senate committee approved a bill to allow national interstate banking by banks in the state beginning in 1991.
sort.
vector angle.
system policy prevents setting proxy settings.
adjust all colors.
reset saved tool options to default values.
invalid line in the diversion file.
less sat.
could not remove item.
error on deleting image.
resource consumption.
no more headings.
parse error.
compressed png.
contact preview.
current gradient reversed.
chulitna.
he loves beauty around him and also wants to look beautiful.
unknown command.
cannot open temporary mailbox.
post to.
could not create the destination folder.
the eights play is a significant step initiated in that direction.
dots 7 and 8.
wheel turn right.
the deal is chiefly designed *-3 to give mitsubishi a window on the u.s. glass industry says ichiro wakui an executive in mitsubishi 's general merchandise department in new york.
change the name of this folder.
height for text box.
include hidden.
lawmakers representing some of the cleaner utilities have been quietly working with the white house to devise ways to tinker with the administration bill to address their acid-rain concerns.
tar checksum failed, archive corrupted.
default bitmap resolution in dots per inch in the export dialog.
verify local data.
workgroup switch.
the economic and foreign ministers of 12 asian and pacific nations will meet in australia next week to discuss global trade issues as well as regional matters such as transportation and telecommunications.
modified.
i'm not sure.
if key never expires.
the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral.
find previous occurrence of the search string.
show hidden files.
rendering supernova.
repository not supported.
text to show in the item.
new password.
split gradient segment uniformly.
15th.
specify the owner of a schema.
different fiscal years have been taken as base years in the preparation of the foregoing chapter.
gstreamer plugin could not be found.
create intersection of selected paths.
don't connect on startup.
preview color.
burns.
konya.
autojoin.
but the new 1977 pcs unlike earlier built-from-kit types such as the altair sol and imsai had keyboards and could store about two pages of data in their memories.
start time.
after your first three weeks of sleep deprivation you 're scarcely in touch with reality any more ; without psychiatric treatment you may well be unable to fend for yourself ever again.
at constant prices, the total development expenditure in fiscal years 1990/91 and 1991/92 is es timated to be rs. 2997.5 and rs. 2320.8 million respectively.
failed to change nickname.
hide if empty.
after reaching adulthood individuals perform marriage.
expected ',' or got.
error running.
wrote records with missing files and mismatched files.
recent documents list size.
every school should maintain a library with the aim to encourage wider and wider readership among students.
no groups to ungroup in the selection.
whether the menu item is checked.
elco industries inc. said it expects net income in the year ending june 30 1990 to fall below a recent analyst 's estimate of $ 1.65 a share.
whether the menubar has access keys.
sales rose 4  to $ 3.28 billion from $ 3.16 billion.
annette.
as part of the planning and implementation processes programmes will be implemented with the objective of benefiting the population living below the poverty line.
tuktoyaktuk.
enable text wrapping.
show or hide the statusbar at the bottom of the window.
asia/sakhalin.
annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns.
keyword.
encouraging long-term investing.
the bases of all wars are selfishness and ambition.
log out.
paso robles.
clear undo history.
adjust.
mr. hahn attributes the gains to the philosophy of concentrating on what a company knows best.
a domain address was not specified.
can change accels.
see also.
if true, the theme color scheme used for text entry boxes will be used for the terminal, instead of colors provided by the user.
forward.
shrink.
show text.
import key.
start event  link.
day view.
more than three in five said they are under a great deal of stress most of the time compared with less than one in two u.s. consumers and one in four in japan.
render options.
file size unknown.
id string to use for this application.
document.
erase.
operation interrupted.
this appointment recurs.
service unavailable.
save image.
asia/samarkand.
start time.
life of georgia is part of the nationale nederlanden group based in the netherlands.
the rate of growth in deficit financing from 1972/73 to 1989/90 was 18.4 percent at current prices and 7.9 percent at 1972/73 constant prices.
when enabled, the selected gradient will be used for all tools.
invalid key data missing uids. this may be due to a computer with a date set in the future or a missing selfsignature.
sample analyze.
in the field of higher education, while the number of students in 1961 was 5,143, this increased to 102,130 in fy 1989/90.
from 1953 to 1955 9.8 billion kent cigarettes with the filters were sold the company said.
i even dreamt about school and new things to do with my students.
convert selected object to path.
pat d'amico.
new task list.
medical confidential.
upington.
lock.
so he adjusts.
if the japanese companies are seriously considering their survival they could do at least three things to improve the situation : raise salaries higher than those of financial institutions ; improve working conditions better offices and more vacations for example ; accept and hire more labor from outside japan.
create an image using multiple gray images as color channels.
unidata netcdf document.
tab expand.
end event  message.
cd quality, lossy.
the purchasing managers ' report is based on data provided by more than 250 purchasing executives.
shortcut key.
connect.
could not stat '.
quillayute.
the percent value must be between 0 and 100, inclusive.
more sat.
this was a closed economy concept, which disregards the analysis of interrelationships among diverse economic areas.
horizontal offset.
spacing percent.
unable to initialize frontend.
do not enable text wrapping.
workspace 10.
smaller previews.
select interpreter folders.
much of mr. lane 's film takes a highly romanticized view of life on the streets though probably no more romanticized than mr. chaplin 's notion of the tramp as the good-hearted free spirit.
patterns are not supported by dia.
image.
lotus 123 spreadsheet.
workspace name.
one of ronald reagan's attributes as president was that he rarely gave his blessing to the claptrap that passes for  consensus  in various international institutions.
panama was stripped of this right because of u.s. differences with the noriega regime but the central american country would have received a quota of 30,537 metric tons over a 21-month period ending sept. 30 1990.
remove all manual kerns and glyph rotations from a text object.
we work damn hard at what we do for damn little pay and what she did cast unfair aspersions on all of us.
thus, the total trade deficit, which was rs. 16,594.2 million in 1990/91, increased to rs. 19,011.9 million in 1991/92.
contacts.
it is also a major source of foreign exchange and revenue.
trash icon visible on desktop.
toggles object snapping.
view folder.
aerospace earnings sagged 37  for the quarter and 15  for the year largely due to lower b-1b program profit ; the last of the bombers rolled out in april 1988.
interactively set options.
show hours.
you are about to add as a revoker forthis operation cannot be undone! are you sure you want to continue?
width of the messagelist pane.
set the terminal's zoom factor 1.0  normal size.
in investing on the basis of future transactions a role often performed by merchant banks trading companies can cut through the logjam that small-company owners often face with their local commercial banks.
a commonwealth edison spokesman said that tracking down the two million customers whose addresses have changed during the past 3 1/2 years would be  an administrative nightmare.
statistics canada said service-industry output in august rose 0.4  from july.
fetch album covers from the internet.
mr. sonnett said that clients who pay cash may include alleged drug dealers who do n't have domestic bank accounts.
time and tide waits for none.
text entry settings.
smudge.
d in addition, it is appropriate to evaluate government financial position on the basis of current and constant process.
angoon.
reassigning the shortcut will cause it to be removed from.
save comment.
is not a valid room name.
go to previous page.
additional efforts are required to develop the necessary infrastructure for tourism, which has evolved as a main source of foreign currency earnings, and the involvement of private sector in these efforts should be encouraged.
gradients used in gimp.
shift horizontally.
shared memory.
however, both internal and external factors were responsible for this high price rise.
unified canadian aboriginal syllabics.
specification and description language.
burns lake.
in addition, since majority of these students come from rural backgrounds where there is not much cultural interchange.
off.
palette selection.
the prior-year period includes a one-time favorable tax adjustment on the b-1b bomber program and another gain from sale of the industrial sewing-machine business which made net $ 185.9 million or 70 cents a share.
still scientists breathed a collective sigh of relief about the finding because it demonstrates how to overcome the  flux pinning  problem that earlier this year was widely publicized as undercutting new superconductors ' potential *t*-2.
shortcut is already taken by from the group.
preserve the original image as a background.
nissan scheduled a seven-yen interim dividend payment unchanged.
click and drag in the preview to define the distortions to apply to the image.
money is not everything but it is necessary and business is not volunteer work.
these first magnitude wines ranged in price from $ 40 to $ 125 a bottle.
ubuntu software center.
fire wood was his first source of energy.
a jackson given domain.
other financial institutions involved include barclays bank plc midland bank plc security pacific corp. chemical banking corp. 's chemical bank citicorp 's citibank and mitsubishi finance international.
unable to parse package file 1.
template for custom characteristics.
scappoose.
send message receipts.
already in the mode.
workday start hour.
crystalline structure model.
when enabled, the image window will automatically resize itself when zooming into and out of images.
similarly, the share of agriculture, irrigation and forestry will increase to 25.8 percent for 24.5 and this increase will have been made possible mainly by the development programmes related to rural development.
3.2 sources of financing development expenditure an expansionary policy, especially on internal and external expenditure and borrowings, was adopted during this period.
line selected up from cursor position.
default.
accelerator to move the current tab to the right.
change password.
tab position.
set the shuffle mode.
when transforming, show.
line background.
broken symbolic link.
new south wales.
west virginia.
widget name.
edit.
subscription required.
south korea has different concerns.
is this rich text item visible?
requires the folder set.
add / remove.
whether the separator is drawn, or just blank.
add word.
zabol.
play a sound for new mail.
user count.
as nepal is a severely resource constrained country, it would not be an exaggeration to state that the development process can not be further advanced without foreign assistance.
the people living in mountains are of different cultures than those living in hills and the terai.
polygonal.
italian.
westflanders.
pass failed, server said.
the art of change-ringing is peculiar to the english and like most english peculiarities unintelligible to the rest of the world.
the herald was left in limbo.
africa/brazzaville.
map to sphere.
statistics.
sort.
error sending message.
couldn't allocate memory for header.
toolbar.
create circles, ellipses, and arcs.
moreover, due attention must be paid in the plan to the appropriate allocation of resources and the methods of their effective utilization.
left start at.
minimal number of undo levels.
prices rose on the news that a sizable west german refinery was damaged in a fire tightening an already tight european market.
failed to create gstreamer element check your installation.
scroll on keystroke.
explicit state.
this technique is applicable to a wide variety of crops  he said *t*-1 and added that some modifications may be necessary to accommodate the peculiarities of each type of crop.
guide.
open files.
during the past two years, there was instability in agricultural production.
the balanced development of all sectors in equally important in view if the government's commitment to rural development and upliftment of the standard of living of the poor people.
height of the messagelist pane.
license.
sault ste. marie.
tyumen.
whether to use the colors from the theme for the terminal widget.
midwest financial has $ 2.3 billion in assets and eight banks.
longer maturities are thought to indicate declining interest rates because they permit portfolio managers to retain relatively higher rates for a longer period.
not installed.
the screen shows two distorted unrecognizable photos presumably of two politicians.
error adding list.
there may be an international viewpoint cast on the funds listed here  mr. porter says.
the lack of a suitable working atmosphere, the gradual decline in the morale of civil servants and the lack of the sense of responsibility can be cited as examples of additional constraints.
start point.
governments legislate and judiciaries administer the law.
cannot crop because the current selection is empty.
hide a specific column.
clickdrag to move the selection mask.
accessibility in kubuntu.
cannot add encryption certificate.
more black smaller value.
no value set for '.
america/cayenne.
cannot create directory.
drive.
prompt for confirmation at exit.
man has been competitive by nature.
none.
contact information.
you 're dead in the water if you are n't segmenting the market  says anne moore president of synergistics research corp. a bank consulting firm in atlanta.
unknown.
week starts on.
link type.
icon.
they commit robberies, murders and cheat to get ahead in lives.
compress saved files.
/sort objects/default/as inserted.
constrain aspect ratio.
a list of recently played games.
find the next package with unsatisfied dependencies.
newton.
show/hide dialogs.
save as.
so, children are more attached with their mother.
add channel public key.
i went to bed early that night.
curves.
a scheme exception occurred.
resize.
forwarded message.
unknown position for frame piece.
this new philosophy of planning will be reflected in the procedural structure and methodology of the plan.
empty trash.
the non-governmental organizations will be given full autonomy to function in specific priority areas.
le mars.
ruth k. nelson cullowhee n.c.
first of america which now has 45 banks and $ 12.5 billion in assets announced an agreement to acquire the peoria ill. bank holding company in january.
i would predict that within a short time most of them would find thunderbird a satisfactory substitute for chivas regal and that their  normal  phobias anxieties depressions and substance abuse would increase dramatically.
compiled at.
horizontal.
ljubljana.
remove empty borders from the layer.
optional participant.
steer.
clear all.
some banks are already moving in that direction according to alvin t. sale marketing director at first union corp. in charlotte.
glow paint options.
is flagged.
tab label.
despite policy-pronouncements and efforts in the previous plans, disparities between rural and urban areas and among development regions have increased.
that sounds neat but this government any government propagandizes its own people every day.
each 50,000 swiss franc note is convertible from nov. 30 1989 to march 16 1994 at a 5  premium over the closing share price monday when terms are scheduled to be fixed.
date added.
but in august first atlanta national bank introduced its crown account a package designed to lure customers such as ms. driskill.
application supplied widget for custom previews.
software development/source code.
normally closed position switch horizontal.
punctuation, open.
disable all external thumbnailers.
you must specify a file, not a directory.
mouse and touchpad settings….
database.
image height.
stock left.
permission was granted within this period to three private companied to operate air services and to one to operate companies to operate air services and to one to operate helicopter service.
amount to increase child's size on either side.
email certificate trust settings.
farmers also benefited from strong livestock prices as the nation 's cattle inventory dropped close to a 30-year low.
by description.
rather than increasing dividends some companies have used cash to buy back some of their shares notes steven g. einhorn co-chairman of the investment policy committee at goldman sachs & co.
fill with.
invert direction slider moves to increase range value.
in the interview at headquarters yesterday afternoon both men exuded confidence and seemed to work well together.
intermediate event  rule.
prompt the user before completing a connection.
too many error messages!
display a preview of what will be done before doing it.
pixbuf expander closed.
replace all.
fill is averaged over selected objects.
line  can't update entry.
when an error occurs.
hurricanes and earthquakes leave a trail of death, injury and havoc.
and says mr. dinkins he did n't know the man his campaign paid for a get-out-the-vote effort had been convicted of kidnapping.
number of channels.
waiting.
should the effect be inversed?
compatibility.
make this photo the primary photo.
iranshahr.
the time may come when knowledge of higher mathematics is far more wide-spread.
user.
w.n. whelen & co. of georgetown del. and its president william n. whelen jr. also of georgetown were barred from transacting principal trades for 90 days and were jointly fined $ 15,000.
combine.
yes, do as i say!
processing was halted because there were too many errors.
béziers.
in october the busiest month of the year so far daily volume averaged roughly 145 million shares.
save the current search as a file.
spike angle 1 random.
change the strength of the selected vector.
nothing.
san juan.
block 2, 28.
the contact list you are sending to is configured to hide list recipients. many email systems add an apparentlyto header to messages that only have bcc recipients. this header, if added, will list all of your recipients in your message. to avoid this, you should add at least one to or cc recipient.
government constructed projects commanding less than 2,000 ha in the terai and 500 he in the hills will continue to be handed over to the ser committees.
relationship.
copy.
only 7,5 percent will be borne through internal borrowing.
invalid string in argument vector at.
in the seventh plan, the share of government sector stood at 41 percent of gross fixed investment, which will come down to 35.9 percent in the eighth plan.
ms asf audio.
s/mime signature.
failed to start command.
defiance.
app id.
horizontal scale per column in  of tile width.
loading.
download location.
connection timeout.
resize/move.
can't find parent of object.
a single documenter entry.
accounts.
the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank.
the golden share was scheduled to expire at the beginning of but although the golden share has been waived a hostile bidder for jaguar would still have to alter the british concern 's articles of association which ban shareholdings of more than 15.
northern ireland.
didn't understand ' expected true or false.
conflict search.
autocomplete.
revoke.
smart home/end.
z shell script.
change address to.
restore evolution directory.
find objects by the value of the style attribute exact or partial match.
please enter the channel private group name and passphrase.
remove mask from selection.
scientists had obtained even higher current-carrying capacity in thin films of the new superconductors but have had problems increasing the amount of current that bulk crystals could carry.
volunteering means to carry out a duty or a job without expecting repayment or remuneration.
blast.
anim animation.
america/vancouver.
document ' has the wrong type of root node should be.
tallahassee.
every year,there is a need to make huge investment on the repair, maintenance and operation of large projects.
the directions in which the size group affects the requested sizes of its component widgets.
says mr. sale :  i think more banks are starting to realize that we have to be more like the department store not the boutique.
port lavaca.
there are three final points.
layer select.
funny business  soho 228 pages $ 17.95 by gary katzenstein is anything but.
not in a table.
unable to open for writing.
try lubuntu without installing.
it is the official language of air transport and shipping.
cannot send message service not connected.
next script.
instead, as a long-term consequence, there emerged a situation after land reform where nepal, a major food exporter of south asia, turned into an importer of food grains and the situation accelerated the process if migration, too.
the name or email address of this contact already exists in this folder. would you like to add it anyway?
install.
random seed.
password.
posterize does not operate on indexed layers.
the family planning devices are still not readily available in various parts of the country.
brasero media burning library.
gnome calendar.
fasa.
mark as important.
similarly, there has emerged an urgent need to upgrade the quality of primary and secondary education.
maximum size of the ruler.
has you.
show folders first in windows.
web page.
the default display for gdk.
fill opacity.
in the past, especially during the seventh plan period 19851990, it was estimated that there had occurred an unprecedented growth in agricultural production.
america/saopaulo.
password must be changed.
maximum size.
paraguay.
change the color saturation by this percentage for each column.
in this perspective, emphasis is given on formulating integrated and inter regional programmes that primarily focus on the creation of productive, emphasis is given on formulating integrated and interregional programmes that primarily focus on the creation of productive assets base and additional employment opportunities to alleviate poverty, extension of social services like health education, vocational training and drinking water, and effective management and protection of natural resources.
psychobilly.
concordia.
contents.
second.
the antitrust staffs of both the ftc and justice department were cut more than 40  in the reagan administration and enforcement of major merger cases fell off drastically during that period.
signing is not supported by this cipher.
key west.
kpresenter presentation.
in 1990/91, while the trade deficit with india was rs. 6,071.2 million, with other countries it stood at rs. 10,523 million.
hence, the pace of development of the industrial sector was slow in the past.
it was our choice to have paan and spit it out on the road.
you cannot copy a folder into itself.
click this to switch to workspace.
couldn't generate pgp key.
categories.
asia/rangoon.
total dependency version space.
search text objects.
read the full user's manual of aptitude.
support for playing of audio cds as music source.
a programme to control the increasing population was indeed indispensable.
could not send the search request.
bond prices and the dollar both gained modestly.
temporary failure resolving.
in addition, the expenditure under the economic services for the maintenance if physical infrastructures, which were created with large investment, remained low.
content tampered with or altered in transit.
couldn't save file.
no filter selected.
pack data error.
you may also specify modification to the actions which will be taken. to do so, type an action character followed by one or more package names or patterns. the action will be applied to all the packages that you list. the following actions are available.
bozeman.
failure to complete the form had been punishable as a misdemeanor until last november when congress determined that the crime was a felony punishable by up to 10 years in prison.
iconify on away.
reset the speed of the animation.
the width for each table cell. can be a number or a percent.
generate complex sinusoidal textures.
mary elizabeth ariail another social-studies teacher says she believed mrs. yeargin wanted to keep her standing high so she could get a new job that would n't demand good hearing.
winnemucca.
shortcut key.
move the window to workspace number first workspace is 0.
which side of the notebook holds the tabs.
federal funds : 9 1/2  high 8 3/4  low 8 3/4  near closing bid 9  offered.
due to the distortions arising out of industrial protectionism there could not be created a favourable environment for increasing the investment in nationally imoortant industries related to production, employment and income distribution.
whether the action is visible.
the survival of spinoff cray computer corp. as a fledgling in the supercomputer business appears to depend heavily on the creativity and longevity of its chairman and chief designer seymour cray.
asia/baku.
extended partition.
this is most likely a transient problem, please try again later.
fort chipewyan.
the address cannot be found.
plugin can only handle grayscale images.
gcalctool.
failure to commence the construction or the need to defer construction of projects included in the seventh plan like babai, sikta and others in want of funding source.
build command failed.
pueblo.
fujitsu said it bid the equivalent of less than a u.s. penny on three separate municipal contracts during the past two years.
can't undo.
during the current crop year brazil was expected to produce 6.9 million tons of sugar a drop from 8.1 million tons in 1988-89.
i think program trading is basically unfair to the individual investor  says leo fields a dallas investor.
also in new york israel silverman an insurance-company lawyer comments that program trading  increases volatility but i do n't think it should be banned.
one of the constituents of the solar plant is mica that is available in abundance.
yakima.
manistique.
too simple.
failed to write.
convert selection to a rectangle with tiled pattern fill.
one bright sign is that a growing number of women have entered the once male-dominated field ; more than a third of the ringers today are women.
no permission to do operation on storage.
this key expired on.
click to hide/unhide addresses.
a reading below 50  indicates that the manufacturing sector is slowing while a reading above 50  suggests that the industry is expanding.
feather border.
average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more.
the only highway that connects both the east and the east to the capital is getting even busier.
the multiplier to be applied when using the mouse scroll wheel for zooming. this value defines the zooming step used for each scroll event. for example, 0.05 results in a 5 zoom increment for each scroll event and 1.00 result in a 100 zoom increment.
intensity.
lethbridge.
new bern.
the filing adds a new twist to market speculation that coniston partners a new york money manager has bought more than 5  of ual stock and may challenge the ual board 's decision last week to remain independent.
properties.
unmaximize horizontally.
the loan disbursement of the commercial banks increased at 17.8 percent per annum during this period.
brightness.
is fuzzy at byte   dropping it.
keyboard shortcut to close a tab.
is now known as.
unclump objects try to equalize edgetoedge distances.
currently both massachusetts and connecticut where most of bank of new england 's operations are allow interstate banking only within new england.
so far it is not operating petrol pumps.
week view.
total trade deficit during this period had increased at an average if 16.6 percent per annum due to a limited export base in comparison to import.
africa/lome.
style of bevel around the toolbar.
how many units make up an inch.
color variation.
the display format for the status line.
shared dirty.
done.
apply transformation to selection.
home office.
the smallest brush to create.
the language support is not installed completely.
selection not found.
mr. bernstein said he will stay until dec. 31 and work with his successor who is to be named soon.
therefore, the state directed and controlled economic systems pursued for the last thirty years will be gradually phased out and policies will be adopted to carry out development through free market-oriented liberal economic systems.
it was believed that the system would be instrumental to fulfil the national objective of education towards preparation of neces sary manpower for economic development with the dissemination of requisite knowledge, science, development, conservation and promotion of technical expertise and skill.
lewistown.
this task selects a variety of package useful for a general purpose mail server system.
manually select packages to install in aptitude.
session overload.
one writer signing his letter as  red-blooded balanced male  remarked on the  frequency of women fainting in peals  and suggested that they  settle back into their traditional role of making tea at meetings.
rename the selection.
asia/ulaanbaatar.
allowing the removal of.
property name.
no clones to unlink in the selection.
fullscreen.
a few days later, i was told that the lady had suffered only minor injuries from the incident.
unable to unmount connected server.
global.
rows.
usage.
leave fullscreen.
precious metals gold in particular currently are being influenced more by stock market gyrations than the dollar as traders seek greater investment stability according to william o'neill vice president of research at elders futures in new york.
you may not change.
delete point.
user online status attributes.
show message preview below the message list.
i am sure they will be going for a full bid.
the default size of an icon for a thumbnail in the icon view.
the principal role of the government will be to develop physical infrastructure necessary for economic development, such as roads and communications, to bring the people so far left out into the mainstream of development, by providing basic social services such as health care, education and drinking water, essential to the long-term national development, the participation of the private sector in these areas, too, will be welcomed, the government will initiate a process of disengagement and disinvestment from a number of areas that may be managed more efficiently by the private sector without jeopardizing social interests.
the average number of ft-se option contracts traded on the london exchange has surged nearly tenfold since the contract 's launch in 1984.
files.
â in the field of social services, the country has not been able to derive much benefit except for some progress in the field of education.
minimum key length.
unable to mount the floppy drive. the floppy is probably in a format that cannot be mounted.
châlonsenchampagne.
lens distortion.
-lrb- no one has worked out the players' average age but most appear *-1 to be in their late 30s.
video camera.
still  much less -lcb- index-arbitrage activity -rcb- is done over here than in the u.s.  said richard barfield chief investment manager at standard life assurance co. which manages about # 15 billion $ 23.72 billion in united kingdom institutional funds.
you have to join the channel before you are able to join the private group.
chetumal.
the export, which stood at rs. 7,503/7 million in 1990/91, increased to rs. 13,939.4 million in 1991/92.
magenta.
deselect upon layer change.
nepal.
the minority argument meanwhile is that businesses have the financial wherewithal this time around to declare sharply higher dividends even if their earnings weaken.
the per capita food grain availability was diversely affected owing to the low growth rate in food grain supply in comparison to the growth rate in population.
lightwave scene.
i woke up at the usual time for school that tuesday morning.
dialogs.
searching by type.
coleman.
block device.
moreover we 've probably been the most aggressive firm on the street in reducing costs which are down around 40  over the last six months.
the position of the opposite end of the selection from the cursor in chars.
/buddies.
abiword document.
gary.
show help options.
glow radius.
icon view model.
wrote records.
error closing session file.
could not read color entries from.
show the photo of the sender in the message reading pane.
in order to meet the urban demand for milk, eggs, fish, meat, fruits and vegetables, priority will be given to intensive productions programmes in areas adjacent to the cities and along road corridors to urban areas.
my teacher said it was ok for me to use the notes on the test  he said.
foreground color as a string.
many attorneys have returned incomplete forms to the irs in recent years citing attorney-client privilege.
darker.
barrels were dumped on the courter property a complaint was made but there is no evidence the barrels were a serious threat to the environment.
close.
america/anchorage.
remote login.
your vcard file.
could not connect with command.
scrollbars.
and so it went through the first half : an ingeniously chosen potpourri of pieces none longer than five minutes none that would disturb or challenge a listener.
select file.
apply various lighting effects to an image.
it rose 7/8 to 18 1/4.
invalid arguments to usertag.
region selected for plugin is empty.
a filename extension to be used when storing files encoded with this profile.
options.
dependencies of.
buddy logs out.
bell industries inc. increased its quarterly to 10 cents from seven cents a share.
kill it  he says.
supply.
as individual investors have turned away from the stock market over the years securities firms have scrambled to find new products that brokers find easy to sell.
it is a passion that usually stays in the tower however.
fast integer.
buddy logs in.
the attachment could not be saved.
microsoft wmv video.
not equal to.
sales rose 11  to 292.32 billion yen from 263.07 billion yen.
cannot read info directory.
arrangements wi11 be made to avai1 information relating to groundwater to concerned district development committees, district irrigation offices and other agencies.
type 3.
new york-based alleghany is an insurance and financial services concern.
render detail to pass to the theme engine.
similar levels hamstrung barge shipments last year in the wake of the worst drought in 50 years.
she had seen cheating before but these notes were uncanny.
the soviet union usually begins buying u.s. crops earlier in the fall.
color selection dialog.
default font.
the government 's borrowing authority dropped at midnight tuesday to $ 2.80 trillion from $ 2.87 trillion.
adjust the spike angle 1 causes a random angle to be chosen.
set the last specified tab as the active one in its window.
illegal instruction.
the path is too long.
the dispute shows clearly the global power of japan's financial titans.
toggles object snapping for this window.
program trading critics also want the federal reserve board rather than the futures industry to set such margins.
in fact most of the troubles in the world stem from religious fanatism or extremism.
sea containers ltd. said it might increase the price of its $ 70-a-share buy-back plan if pressed by temple holdings ltd. which made an earlier tender offer for sea containers.
apply solution.
delete message after acting.
moncton.
a similar technique is almost impossible to apply to other crops such as cotton soybeans and rice.
when implementing any project a fixed sum of money will be borne by his majesty's government and the rest by the users' committee.
select folder for podcasts.
mr. phelan said the big board is likely to study the program-trading issue.
copy the selected partition to the clipboard.
your current mood.
food production for an increasing world population will be put at risk.
while the s&p tally does n't measure the magnitude of dividend changes a further slippage in the number of dividend increases could be a harbinger of slower dividend growth next year.
effect.
select destination file.
recording a gradual increase, the shared of finished products increased to 82.9 percent of the total export in fy 1989/90.
weeks.
hub subdued.
restricted copyright.
invert selection in all visible and unlocked layers.
the system does not have information about the available languages yet. do you want to perform a network update to get them now?
line up.
prosecutors alleged that she was trying to bolster students ' scores to win a bonus under the state 's 1984 education improvement act.
the border relief style.
microwebserver.
natural disasters are natural events that cause the loss of lives and property.
implements, class implements a specific interface.
autoclave.
sinusoidal.
other big common holders are carl lindner 's american financial investor irwin jacobs and pacific financial research though the latter cut its stake this summer.
flame.
increased government control, adhoc regulations and procedures, license requirements and other forms of counterproductive bureaucratic behaviour tended to discourage decision making process and delays in the disbursement of budgets increased project implementation costs and resulted in the under utilization of the administrative capacity.
toolbar is visible.
a shift to producing more alcohol and less sugar had been expected but the latest news if true indicates a more drastic shift than had been anticipated.
financially it never recovered ; editorially it had its moments.
the psychology is still :  we want stocks up but if they do n't carry we 're going to sell them.
bevel edges.
rgb image.
content engine cache director.
gimp output. type any character to close this window.
tool options.
configure extended input devices, such as a graphics tablet.
group by this field.
successful.
could not cancel operation.
unable to lock the download directory.
esfahan.
present economic conditions the history of planned process of economic development in nepal is short.
service not defined.
major grid line color.
due date.
it is difficult to grade the senses in relative importance to mankind.
simple modem.
the aeroplanes are used for dropping bombs.
transport and communication 3.1 transport a.
bonobo activation options.
23rd.
radial gradient.
as the liberal and open policies professed by the new industrial policy for improvements on the economy as a whole will create a competitive industrial climate, maximum benefits must be derived from the changed climate by enhancing the industrial capabilities of the entrepreneurs involved in this sector.
enter new passphrase for.
unknown alignment type.
cannot move contact.
the texas oilman has acquired a 26.2  stake valued at more than $ 1.2 billion in an automotive-lighting company koito manufacturing co.
prosecutors need court permission to obtain the tax returns of an individual or a business.
in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday usx shares closed up $ 1.25 at $ 34.625 as the reported earnings exceeded projections by some analysts who had n't expected as great a volume of asset sales.
division.
error listing dirs in '.
center.
preferred language.
here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets as calculated by morgan stanley capital international perspective geneva.
window type has already been assigned a style set.
the given locations contain no images.
join a chat.
email list.
normal.
fractal explorer.
clad in his trademark black velvet suit the soft-spoken clarinetist announced that his new album  inner voices  had just been released that his family was in the front row and that it was his mother 's birthday so he was going to play her favorite tune from the record.
in its latest compilation of performance statistics moody 's investors service found that investment-grade bonds posted a total return of 2.7  in october while junk bonds showed a negative return of 1.5.
neither the targeted growth rate was achieved, nor was poverty alleviated.
the thrift said that  after these charges and assuming no dramatic fluctuation in interest rates the association expects to achieve near record earnings in 1990.
muskogee.
could not clear list.
of subranges.
deep peace  also featured a slide show of lovely but predictable images of clouds beaches deserts sunsets etc.
cannot login to pop server  sasl protocol error.
switch to tab 7.
failed to get all entries in '.
button wheel.
it said it has taken measures to continue shipments during the work stoppage.
the row number to attach the top of a child widget to.
unsupported or invalid bitdepth.
mostly newars live in kathmandu valley.
position.
please select a channel first.
men who have played hard all their lives aren't about to change their habits he says.
create guides.
but is installed.
zealous crop.
find again.
shutting down evolution.
but in the letters sent in recent days christopher j. lezovich of the irs computing center in detroit told attorneys that  failing to voluntarily submit the requested information could result in summons enforcement action being initiated.
part room message leave the current channel, or a specified channel, with an optional message.
abort installation.
rename from.
stephen g. jerritts president and chief executive officer said customers were n't willing to commit to an expensive nbi hardware systems because of the company 's financial troubles.
your preferred contact methods.
number of tiles.
at his new job as partner in charge of federal litigation in the sacramento office of orrick herrington & sutcliffe he will make out much better.
virginia : democratic lt. gov. douglas wilder opened his gubernatorial battle with republican marshall coleman with an abortion commercial produced by frank greer that analysts of every political persuasion agree was a tour de force.
enabled.
php script.
fort myers.
default export resolution.
you must specify at least one folder as a source. either by selecting the folders individually, and/or by selecting all local folders, all remote folders, or both.
you have made no changes, close the editor?
delete all items in the trash.
compensation task.
hoquiam.
cannot open new defaults file.
extra widget.
default folder viewer.
pressing an arrow key moves selected objects or nodes by this distance in px units.
the package is trying to write to the diversion target /.
the higher nonagricultural value added in comparison to the agricultural one will lead to structural changes in the economic by the final year of the plan.
tunisia.
cannot send message one or more invalid recipients.
volume.
dimension origin.
enable/disable bumpmapping image depth.
this is that the reagan revolution spanning eastern europe and tiananmen square shows the power of ideas unencumbered by international civil servants or government functionaries.
summary and folder mismatch, even after a sync.
pgpencrypted file.
hua hin.
asia/damascus.
popup set width.
these funds now account for several billions of dollars in assets.
switch.
finish.
inadequate participation of nongovernmental organisations and the private sectors in the implementation of irrigation projects.
1.2 forest in forestry development, while tree plantation was carried out in 8,956 hechtares in f.y. 1990/91, it was, carried out in 11,794 hectares in f.y. 1991/92.
display info dialog.
paintbrush tool paint smooth strokes using a brush.
move all.
index.
export complete key.
error writing file.
select a certificate to import.
right angle triangle.
and it is n't clear that the soviet union will stay on its record buying pace.
reserves for the five new fields total 50 million barrels.
this has weakened the stability of the economy.
bottom of column.
america/costarica.
file corrupted during write.
nevertheless he said he is negotiating with plant genetic to acquire the technology to try breeding hybrid cotton.
select previous vector.
but i i like to think of it in terms of we all of us won the point.
background set.
doonesbury creator's union troubles are no laughing matter.
layers merge options.
i tried.
second they channel monthly mortgage payments into semiannual payments reducing the administrative burden on investors.
no image width specified.
remove when typing in conversation window.
yasser arafat has written to the chairman of the international olympic committee asking him to back a palestinian bid to join the committee the palestine liberation organization news agency wafa said.
united kingdom.
internal padding.
officials from both nations say the u.s. public 's skittishness about japanese investment could color a second round of bilateral economic talks scheduled for next week in washington.
key not found in configuration.
pattern.
whether to enable immediate deletion.
and the city decided to treat its guests more like royalty or rock stars than factory owners.
error!
stresses and strains develop because of misunderstandings.
invalid login time.
the low-ball bids touch on issues central to the increasingly tense trade debate.
chah bahar.
against the backdrop of the above mentioned problems and challenges, the elected government formed after the general elections of 1991 has initiated in accordance with its manifesto various efforts for the allround development of nepal.
california.
snow showers.
key ' listed as schema for key ' actually stores type '.
regex compilation error.
postal code.
the company 's stock fell $ 1.125 to $ 13.625 in over-the-counter trading yesterday.
full wave rectifier absolute value.
the 1987 statute mrs. yeargin violated was designed to enforce provisions of south carolina 's school-improvement laws.
it might be lonely at the top, but the spectacular view from up high certainly makes it all worth it.
adjust the scale value.
depth merge.
sharp edges.
wittering.
choose a new password.
while the earning from the tourist sector was merely us$ 78,000.00 in 1961/62, us$ 68,343,000,00 was earned in 1989/90 with an average increase of 26 percent per annum.
without admitting or denying wrongdoing the firm consented to findings that it failed to respond  in a timely manner  to the nasd 's requests for information in connection with a customer complaint.
you must log in to access.
pixels above lines.
america/boise.
as a result, investment could not be channeled to productive sectors.
generic building.
importing screenshot.
background of the eighth plan: development and expansionu of irrigation facilities is essential for increasing agricultural production required to ensure economic growth and security in food supply.
line character.
whitecourt.
ping reply received from server.
web aware.
cancel login.
depth.
tar archive gzipcompressed.
empty package cache.
sp ecial attention will be paid to protect private sector participation on various economic activities.
move to the previous solution.
rogers communications inc. said it plans to raise 175 million to 180 million canadian dollars us$ 148.9 million to $ 153.3 million through a private placement of perpetual preferred shares.
on the other hand, it is estimated that about 40 percent of the available drinking water is being list through leakage.
twentynine palms.
keys.
installed.
base selection on all visible layers.
for recipient countries such as thailand and malaysia the investment will provide needed jobs and spur growth.
3.2 communication a.
guarantee by dai-ichi kangyo bank ltd.
move to new window.
these prices seem rather modest however in light of other french wines from current vintages.
fargo.
developed by avrett free & ginsberg new york the $ 6 million campaign pitches enterprise 's consumer-driven service and its free pick-up and drop-off service.
swap two colors in the colormap.
nuevo laredo.
adaptive.
no pattern fills in the selection.
number of the screen to examine or modify.
many arbs are  overleveraged  she says and they  have to sell when things look like they fall apart.
internal storage.
math mode.
dark red.
resolute.
font description as a string, e.g. "sans italic 12".
no matches.
error writing to.
the driver won't hit the horse.
corners.
no such calendar.
foreground extraction.
large extension node.
klawock.
remove directory operation is no longer supported, just remove all the values in the directory.
nor are you free to reprint such material  i was advised.
duststorm.
true if the window should be brought to the user's attention.
compresscompressed file.
left, right, or center justification.
select objects to lower.
terms were n't disclosed.
it was n't clear how nl and mr. simmons would respond if georgia gulf spurns them again.
starts with.
receptivity output variable.
europe/minsk.
europe/helsinki.
predepends.
untitled.
diaper services make a comeback amid growing environmental concerns.
dublin core entities.
cannot find directory.
go to.
encouragement will be given for the operation of government constructed project s commanding over 2,000 ha in the terai and 500 ha in the hills under the joint management of the responsible government agency and the users' committee.
no windows open.
some asian nations are apprehensive about washington 's demand that tokyo step up its military spending to ease the u.s. security burden in the region.
guillotine.
a person’s life is in his own hand.
transformation failed.
projects constructed in the past which now remain non-operational and can be rehabilitated at low cost with the organised participation of farmers,.
the sectoral incremental capital output rations have been estimated on the basis of internal processes of the model.
is outdated.
reset keyboard shortcuts to default values.
the policy and structural reforms to be adopted during the plan period do not permit any great reduction in the average rate of inflation.
with a view to rectify these anomalies, in this context, complementary enterprises and economic activities compatible with the regional means and resources will be implemented.
arctic/longyearbyen.
south korea 's economic boom which began in 1986 stopped this year because of prolonged labor disputes trade conflicts and sluggish exports.
the lacking of the skilled human resources is the main hindrance to pave a concrete path to reach the summit of development.
about this document.
svartnes.
duplicate.
scans.
keep tool box on top of diagram windows.
they compare it to their home towns.
append filename extension automatically.
show the previous page.
deviation threshold.
encrypting message.
warning the following packages cannot be authenticated!
access gateway.
list of directories and files where the style schemes are located.
find backwards.
cell content.
image view.
couldn't parse layout no width specified.
plugins.
in 1991/92, the development expenditure is expected to decrease, according to the revised estimate, by 6.5 percent to reach rs. 14945.7 million.
duplicate value for ' field.
click to add a control point.
show preview pane.
drag path.
remove the fives.
the supplied context handle did not refer to a valid context.
tile source image useful for infinite planes.
baltimore.
phags pa.
stopped.
the other concern was n't identified.
accessible table caption object.
question dialog.
reset.
pictures.
no reason for revoking key.
in respect of the extension of airport facilities, the installation of terminal tower equipment was completed in tribhuvan international airport and at nepalgunj, dhangarhi, surkhet, simra and rumjatar air fields.
press enter to continue.
system status, or system help reply.
a player 's commitment to practice and team image is as important as his batting average.
open the parent folder.
on the desktop.
could not analyze disk usage.
with membership of the church of england steadily dwindling strong-willed vicars are pressing equally strong-willed and often non-religious ringers to attend services.
prepare this folder to be moved with a paste command.
as regards international telecommunication, i.s.d. service was made available to keep contact with several countries of the world.
create new snippet.
costa rica.
the group could not be changed.
november.
according to dr. wright homelessness is  simultaneously a housing problem an employment problem a demographic problem a problem of social disaffiliation a mental health problem a family violence problem a problem created by the cutbacks in social welfare spending a problem resulting from the decay of the traditional nuclear family and a problem intimately connected to the recent increase in the number of persons living below the poverty level.
murmansk.
osijek.
is this what you want to do?
mene grande.
animate.
separator, space.
dax.
buick approached american express about a joint promotion because its card holders generally have a  good credit history  and are  good at making payments  says a spokeswoman for the division.
watercolor style color selector.
grow height.
partial convertibility in foreign exchange was introducted in february 1992.
operations visible.
north dakota.
in reality, records of cultivated areas previously left out were adjusted after cadastral surveys which led to an increase in the crop farming area giving rise to inflated estimates of agricultural production.
return values.
goes up one cell.
crookston.
in an instant, the motorcyclist had reached the lady.
24 hour.
bryce canyon.
mekoryuk.
available encodings.
dealers said 0 the u.k. government 's decision tuesday to waive its protective  golden share  in the auto maker raised prospects of a bidding war between the two u.s. auto giants.
generate a new key.
2d chemical structure.
type text enter to start new line.
set as default.
server port.
configure vpn.
america/chicago.
email 3.
msn home screen name 3.
cannot send message no recipients defined.
are you sure you want to delete this account and all its proxies?
information fields.
there 's no culprit here.
temuco.
we also know that the tort system is a lousy way to compensate victims anyway ; some win the legal lottery others get much less and contingency-fee lawyers take a big cut either way.
password.
exports in october stood at $ 5.29 billion a mere 0.7  increase from a year earlier while imports increased sharply to $ 5.39 billion up 20  from last october.
operation in progress.
in one feature called  in the dumpster  editors point out a product they deem to be a particularly bad offender.
it should be the natural resources defense council.
ezeiza.
background color name.
distribute left edges of targets.
tracing route to.
petropavlovsk.
adequate measures will be effected in the promotion and extension of appropriate technology including irrigation management improvement.
preview.
failed to fork.
cuba.
signature id.
ogallala.
password has been already used. choose another.
collect.
set your home phone number.
though some lawyers reported that prospective acquirers were scrambling to make filings before the fees take effect government officials said they had n't noticed any surge in filings.
switch processor.
monitor profile.
clickdrag to move the component around.
giddings.
message to show in the dialog.
matamoros.
one station manager says he believes viacom 's move is a  pre-emptive strike  because the company is worried that  cosby  ratings will continue to drop in syndication over the next few years.
must be specified for this frame style.
add connection point.
string.
showa shell gained 20 to 1,570 and mitsubishi oil rose 50 to 1,500.
background full height.
although much of this country 's export corn goes to new orleans by barge it is possible for exporters to sidestep the mississippi river by shipping a larger-than-normal amount of corn by train to the port.
the six of spades.
position of paned separator in pixels 0 means all the way to the left/top.
bonobo component browser.
inline documentation section.
what saved many farmers from a bad year was the opportunity to reclaim large quantities of grain and other crops that they had  mortgaged  to the government under price-support loan programs.
applies the paper as it is without embossing it.
reverse.
used by program traders and others to zip orders into the exchange superdot handles about 80  of all orders entered at the exchange.
highway officials insist the ornamental railings on older bridges are n't strong enough to prevent vehicles from crashing through.
developer.
barra do garças.
horizontal position of child in available space. 0.0 is left aligned, 1.0 is right aligned.
cell background color as a gdkcolor.
the application of new policies and methods of the selection of projects and evaluation, in particular, will result in economy in investment, and the investment units in various sectors will help the growth of production in those areas.
some analysts say investors should run for the exits if a sustained market rebound pushes the yield below 3.
you don't have the right permissions to read files from folder.
service ready.
encouragement has been provided to the establishment of new financial institutions and the development of capital markets.
the 1990 appropriations bills also contain a number of  muzzling  provisions that violate the recommendation clause in article ii of the constitution.
no matches for your query.
property/casualty insurance has been a tough business in recent quarters as pricing has been cutthroat and natural disasters such as hurricane hugo and the california earthquake have resulted in huge payments.
show the folder containing the scripts that appear in this menu.
mr. hahn began selling non-core businesses such as oil and gas and chemicals.
the nonprofit industry-supported group said its consumer confidence index was 116.4 in october barely changed from a revised 116.3 in september.
server port.
file ' is not an archive part.
enter a name for the copied gflare.
statusbar.
height of the messagelist pane.
display a second backward arrow button on the opposite end of the tab area.
scientific.
can not open file.
architecture.
whitehorse.
punctuation, initial quote.
configure.
you can even take notes extensive notes for the voice folks wo n't look over your shoulder about what you read.
toggle whether we prefix chat room messages with the name of the chat room.
nogales.
choose folders to post the message to.
bad record encountered no package or group entry, skipping.
there are many important reasons why hand phones or cellular phones should not be allowed at the school premises.
similarly, the share of agriculture, irrigation and forestry will increase to 25.8 percent for 24.5 and this increase will have been made possible mainly by the development programmes related to rural development.
selectbyword characters.
these nations known as asia 's  little tigers  also are contributing to southeast asia 's integration but their influence will remain subordinate to japan 's.
the first hybrid corn seeds produced using this mechanical approach were introduced in the 1930s and they yielded as much as 20  more corn than naturally pollinated plants.
don't report.
turn bright spots into starry sparkles.
this objective and the concept of equity are complementary to each other.
the fund also might buy and sell futures and options contracts subject to approval by the new york state insurance department.
three year plan progress during the second plan, the progress made was significant from the point of view of rapid economic development.
for the attainment of equitable economic development, it is necessary to accelerate demands for labour and to expedite food supply.
rise.
connecting to.
levels does not operate on indexed layers.
increases the speech rate.
currency symbols.
zoom all.
deal the cards.
skövde.
mr. sherwood said reaction to sea containers ' proposal has been  very positive.
no space left on device.
black diamond.
names of entities responsible for making contributions to the content of this document.
midnight.
window placement.
button forward.
tozeur.
on vacation.
last set color.
the provided targetname parameter contained an invalid or unsupported type of name.
clear all.
cairns.
no such command in this context.
activatable.
industrial confidential.
set current global proxy exception.
this indicates that dance traditions of nepal are very ancient.
mississippi.
thus, it became the foreign trade toward a specified goal of the economy during the first decade of the panchayat regime.
enable/disable high quality preview.
as shown in table 1, the share of non -agricultural sector will rise from 44.5 percent in 1991/92 to 47.3 percent in 1996/97.
similarly, the area, the production rate and the productivity rate of cash crops increased by 1.8 percent, 5.1 percent and 3.3 percent respectively over the period.
name is both primary and slave.
nylev municipal fund inc. offering of five million common shares.
document was empty or contained only whitespace.
these factors have impeded the attainment of stability in the growth of export.
we don't handle activating shlib objects in a remote process yet.
america/yakutat.
vpn login message.
asia/thimphu.
evince is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty without even the implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. see the gnu general public license for more details.
general options.
eastsound.
repeat.
setup custom game.
language set.
application.
provided by.
remove buddy.
recenter segment's midpoint.
coolangatta.
background stipple mask.
general.
hainaut.
many parents and adults do not allocate time for physical activity.
unlike traditional open-end mutual funds most of these one-country portfolios are the  closed-end  type issuing a fixed number of shares that trade publicly.
make the expanders indented.
tree walking failed.
scale text layer.
there was an error displaying help.
imports of manmade-fiber sweaters in 1988 totaled about $ 405 million from taiwan $ 400 million from south korea and $ 125 million from hong kong according to the itc.
monospace font.
ypad.
the theory is that seymour is the chief designer of the cray-3 and without him it could not be completed.
extra space at the top and bottom of the menu.
take a look then at the main attack commercials that set the tone for tuesday 's elections in new york city new jersey and virginia : new york city : the screen fills with a small tight facial shot of david dinkins democratic candidate for mayor of new york city.
tooltips.
the rural development infrastructure will provide employment opportunities to the growing labour force of the rural sector.
this would put much of the land in temperate climates under sea-water.
errors.
bejaia.
a sample plugin in c with no features.
plural.
invite.
cannot create a regex for all the transitions, the syntax highlighting process will be slower than usual. the error was.
heating/cooling coil.
rotated.
the number of columns in the table.
robert p. tassinari 63 was named senior vice president of eastern utilities.
you can not rotate the whole image if there's a selection.
multiply.
mombetsu.
pembrey.
close all open files.
must specify some directories to break.
fort pierce.
link color.
but dr. genel warns that dr. mason 's ruling may discourage private funding.
arc upward.
earlier, we thought that speech communication sufficed for the promotion of understanding.
the widget to be monitored for accelerator changes.
preferred format.
random house chairman robert bernstein said he is resigning from the publishing house he has run for 23 years.
empty trash.
cannot send message sender address not valid.
filter pack.
pulse step.
frequent drought and excessive rain have hampered the actual growth of agricultural reduction on one and, while on the other, the rapid population growth has led to a situation of food import for meeting the growing demand.
insert.
find in message.
foreground set.
the company said its industrial unit continues to face margin pressures and lower demand.
whether to display a stock label with the name of the previewed file.
there 's a lynch-mob psychology right now  says the top program-trading official at a wall street firm.
the unknown card.
earlier this week dr. sullivan tried to defuse these charges by stressing that candidates to head the nih and the cdc will be judged by  standards of scientific and administrative excellence  not politics.
clarksburg.
lithuania.
display window buttons with icons only.
take focus.
cannot open icon file for object type.
install a diskless image server.
leftrightup arrow.
antenna.
these factors consist of, on the one hand, the positive aspects of the new aspirations and enthusiasm among the general public and, on the other, the negative aspects of the legacy of economic depravity left behind by the panchayat regime.
so far they said investors appear unenthusiastic about the new issue which might force the government to raise the coupon to more than 7.
pixels of blank space above paragraphs.
saint kitts and nevis.
partition.
invalid root element.
default forward style.
compiler directive.
rename.
predepends upon.
waskish.
all archives.
there was a huge crowd gathered at one of the houses further up the street.
displacing.
diagram.dia.
expunging old messages.
all arguments against program trading even those pressed without fact conclude with three expected results after  reforms  are implemented : 1 reduced volatility 2 a long-term investment focus and 3 a level playing field for the small investor.
graphics.
university patents inc. based in westport conn. said it seeks johnson & johnson 's profits from sales of retin-a estimated at $ 50 million a similar amount of punitive damages and the right to license retin-a elsewhere.
best fit.
volumetric flow.
create abstract coupledmap lattice patterns.
vertically aligned compressor.
reversed order.
source account.
whether this tag affects the font weight.
clark j. vitulli was named senior vice president and general manager of this u.s. sales and marketing arm of japanese auto maker mazda motor corp.
number of anchors.
coleco industries inc. a once high-flying toy maker whose stock peaked at $ 65 a share in the early 1980s filed a chapter 11 reorganization plan that provides just 1.125 cents a share for common stockholders.
tornoff menu.
cloud white.
default height.
multipart message.
lansing.
traders said prices also were supported by widespread rumors that the soviet union is on the verge of receiving most favored nation status from the u.s.
enter key passphrase.
share music and play shared music on your local network.
if you proceed, the account information and all proxy information will be deleted permanently.
highlight current line.
the agency was so totally subverted from the high principles of its founding that even the soviets now wonder about an agency that seemed so congenial to them.
five things you can do for $ 15,000 or less :.
select all messages in the same thread as the selected message.
contact.
image resolution is out of bounds, using the default resolution instead.
an index of economic activity drawn from the survey stood last month at 47.6  ; a reading above 50  would have indicated that the manufacturing sector was improving.
information technology is bound to bring about cultural transformation in many developing and socialist nations.
car 2, rear view.
bored.
rotate path.
aggregation, one class is part of another.
cuneiform.
ellipses.
for retrieving moving local mail from standard mboxformatted spools into folders managed by evolution.
this would to an extent allow the younger generation to appreciate various beliefs that exist in the country.
compressed gimp document.
metric.
till fy 1960/61 nepal had 99 km. of narrow gauge railway and 23km. long ropeway linking hetauda and kathmandu with a capacity to carry 25 tons of material per hour was constructed and service of trolley bus between kathmandu and bhaktapur covering a distance of 13 km. was brought into operation.
synopsis.
remove.
name of a icon theme to fall back to.
lightness.
the declaration by economy minister nestor rapanelli is believed to be the first time such an action has been called for by an argentine official of such stature.
copperweld said it does n't expect a protracted strike.
step type.
/options/enable logging.
speaker.
bakersfield.
virtually word for word the notes matched questions and answers on the social-studies section of the test the student was taking.
easthaven.
delete episode only.
the vertical alignment of the label.
alarm clock.
the deficit finance will be reduced from 1.7 percent of the gross domestic product in 1991/92 to less than one percent of gdp by the end of the eight plan.
integrator  input top.
phonetic extensions.
convolve.
directorclass fibre channel intelligent switch.
module for gtkfilechooser.
error changing account info.
no server statistics available.
during that period, the currency increased by 21.2 percent ad the current deposit by 9.9 percent.
â macroeconomic impact of total and sectoral investment the reallocation in sectoral investment and economy in resource utilization, accompanied by liberal economic policies, will not only help achieve higher growth rates but also increase employment opportunities and maintain economic stability during the plan period.
rotation.
text outside.
dark blue.
villahermosa.
they are keeping a close watch on the yield on the s&p 500.
send a message.
however, these fears are completely unfounded.
end time is wrong.
print simulation profile.
image width is larger than gimp can handle.
icon view.
mr. otero who apparently has an unpublished number also could n't be reached.
the default action is to install the new version.
presentation helper to make annotations on screen.
what 's more the last time major wall street firms said they were getting out of program trading in the aftermath of the 1987 crash they waited a few months and then sneaked back into it.
blur radius.
somalia.
the $ 6,500 tree is designed to send continuously changing colored light to dozens of fiber-end bunches.
shortcut already exists.
if true, day names are displayed.
light trucks and vans will face the same safety requirements as automobiles under new proposals by the transportation department.
columbia wo n't comment on all the speculation.
weather sunny.
builtin.
games and amusements.
review.
move window to workspace 4.
baltic.
ciudad obregón.
the treasury said it needs to raise $ 47.5 billion in the current quarter in order to end december with a $ 20 billion cash balance.
past, present and future.
foreground color of the title is set.
flip selection.
invalid shortcut.
set a schema and sync. use with shortdesc, longdesc, owner, and type.
dial turn right.
one fourth.
open task.
the two of clubs.
whether to launch the command in the terminal as a login shell.
to get started with encryption you will need keys.
load failed.
detailed information.
the 'manual' browser command has been chosen, but no command has been set.
hence, a situation arose, where sufficient number of schools could not be increased in comparison to the increase in the number of students.
calendar.
browse.
forward stepper.
they attached a second gene for herbicide resistance to the pollen-inhibiting gene.
application options.
the layer has its alpha channel locked.
capitalize the first letter of each selected word.
rename failed,.
enable sound.
6.2 balance of payments situation: the foreign trade and balance of payment situation was used to be taken in isolation till 1970.
wilder has managed to get across the idea that coleman will say anything to get elected governor and more important has been able to put the onus for all the negative campaigning on coleman.
content service module.
packages to be removed these packages have been manually selected for removal.
whether this text is hidden.
till fy 1960/61 nepal had 99 km. of narrow gauge railway and 23km. long ropeway linking hetauda and kathmandu with a capacity to carry 25 tons of material per hour was constructed and service of trolley bus between kathmandu and bhaktapur covering a distance of 13 km. was brought into operation.
he spends his days sketching passers-by or trying to.
primerica which had owned nearly 70  of williams will pay about 16.7 million shares currently valued at almost $ 472 million *u* for the rest of williams.
send backwards.
scale each selected object vertically to match the height of the copied object.
loaded.
mr. ross said irs officials opposed the justice department 's moderate stance on the matter.
japanese kun pronunciation.
installing new version of config file.
error writing to the file.
automatically fix broken packages before installing or removing.
is a virtual package provided by.
yellow.
directions.
agadez.
button back.
in the context of the trade structure of the country during this period, while the foods and raw materials constituted an important place in exp ort in the initial years, the industrial finished products replaced them following their substantial reduction in the later years especially during the seventh plan period.
whether this tag affects the font size.
monterey.
disable connection to session manager.
open location.
the new ad plan from newsweek a unit of the washington post co. is the second incentive plan the magazine has offered advertisers in three years.
the file is missing. this indicates that the application is installed incorrectly, so the dialog can't be displayed.
gnome gconf support.
calvi.
krasnoyarsk.
indian/reunion.
the company currently offers a word-processing package for personal computers called legend.
extend.
underline set.
coloring type for segment.
minimize.
specific header.
3rd.
the student surrendered the notes but not without a protest.
map backwards.
sending to.
tool to switch between windows.
scaling the image to the chosen size will shrink some layers completely away.
moreover police and soldiers continue to harass americans who have filed several protests with the foreign ministry in the past week.
similarly, policies were adopted to increase the role of the private sector in agriculture and to offer additional incentives to lowincome farming families in the course of providing loans.
people familiar with the senate judiciary committee which will vote on the nomination said some liberal members of the panel are likely to question the aba rating in hearings on the matter.
kota kinabalu.
nothing after colon in version number.
whether this tag affects the font stretch.
package is not installed, cannot forbid an upgrade.
managers and presenters insist that chamber music concerts are a hard sell but can audiences really enjoy them only if the music is purged of threatening elements served up in bite-sized morsels and accompanied by visuals ?
use default.
this folder may have been added implicitly, go to the search folder editor to add it explicitly, if required.
error reading transparent color.
destination.
but in addition to these realities, the cost component of the economy has been further aggravated by the dominance of donor driven projects, economically unproductive investments, lack of discipline, limited economic resources of projects, unwarranted expansion of bureaucracy and lack of efficient implementation capabilities.
blend.
ranong.
left brace.
pbm image.
show or hide the grid.
midtones.
this is merly 6.5 percent of gross domestic product.
therefore, the current and future development perspectives will be accorded special emphasis in order to benefit from the ecological interrelationships between the hills and terai.
fairchild.
removed all channel modes.
america/adak.
sustainable economic growth one of the principal objectives of the plan is to achieve a high and sustainable rate of economic growth without which there is no possibility of achieving economic prosperity and its continuity.
remove the kings.
whether the cursor should blink.
title to appear in column header.
time in milliseconds between updates of the devices list.
timezone.
these days students can often find the answer in test-coaching workbooks and worksheets their teachers give them in the weeks prior to taking standardized achievement tests.
mail accounts.
only for files smaller than.
default column order in the list view.
engraving.
public key fingerprint.
how to break the string into multiple lines, if the cell renderer does not have enough room to display the entire string.
about.
the vicar w.d. jones refuses to talk about it saying it would  reopen the wound.
the agriculture sector has still to rely largely on rainfall.
palm springs.
could not connect to the session manager.
transform path.
transitive.
you may not modify the state of any package while a download is underway.
symbol, modifier.
timestamp.
appointments.
edit.
among the lot of them not one is wrestling with good and evil or especially intelligent or even temporarily insane.
aisleriot solitaire.
the michigan democrat 's proposal which is expected today is described by government sources and lobbyists as significantly weaker than the bush administration 's plan to cut utility emissions that lead to acid rain.
create a new mail folder.
when i see prints going into the hands of institutions i know they are n't going to come back on the market.
random seed.
select only within current layer.
mrs. yeargin admits she made a big mistake but insists her motives were correct.
genres and artists.
main window height.
generic softswitch.
truckee.
north adams.
resize/move partition.
gimp will warn the user if an attempt is made to create an image that would take more memory than the size specified here.
this clearly is not real life : no crack dealers no dead-eyed men selling four-year-old copies of cosmopolitan no one curled up in a cardboard box.
align lines right.
4.3 drinking water attention was given towards providing drinking water facility right from the beginning of planned development.
is readable but not writable unable to write configuration file.
later that night, we were told that the access road had been cleared and that there were no casualties or massive damage to property.
apply all operations.
the path is too long.
source channel.
it 's the classic problem of the small businessman  says malcolm davies managing director of trading alliance corp. of new york.
no frame style set for window type in theme add a element.
i think the stock is dead money for a while.
asia/kashgar.
not accepting new users.
deselect all.
meridian.
create new layer.
key agreement.
mouse pointers.
not only is development of the new company 's initial machine tied directly to mr. cray so is its balance sheet.
in addition he says the buy-out business is under pressure  because of the junk bond collapse  meaning that returns are likely to decline as the volume of junk-bond financings shrinks.
in view of the heavy reliance on foreign assistance in the past, it was not possible to drastically reduce this dependence.
reykjavík.
viewed on the basis of cost factor, it seems appropriate to give more emphasis in the construction of small and medium scale hydro electric projects than on iarge scale projects.
extended away.
the six of hearts.
but you can't dismiss mr. stoltzman's music or his motives as merely commercial and lightweight.
no focus.
shreveport.
/sort diagrams.
stockbrokers ' business and pay has been falling.
calendar events.
david wu the company 's representative in taiwan said atlanta-based life of georgia will sell conventional life-insurance products.
outside a young pressman filling a news box with an extra edition headlined  herald examiner closes  refused to take a reader 's quarter.
the trade and transit impasse between nepal and india made 1989/90 an abnormal year, which also contributed to the trade with india drop to its lowest that year.
mask file extension.
bevel width.
lower window below other windows.
number of workspaces.
too many links.
you can only specify a package version with an 'install' command or a 'forbidversion' command.
then an announcer interjects :  it was douglas wilder who introduced a bill to force rape victims age 13 and younger to be interrogated about their private lives by lawyers for accused rapists.
inventor claire marvin says his design virtually eliminates spilling.
selection box alpha.
paintbrush.
match the top two cards of the waste.
the japanese industrial companies should know better.
thus, investme ntsavings ration declined from 33.7 percent in 1989/90 to 32.4 percent in that fiscal year.
password expiration warning.
dvd menu.
enter the new passphrase for.
in the absence of a competitive atmosphere, attention was not paid towards increasing efficiency.
there was and accelerated growth in the expenditure in defence, internal security and debt servicing.
you have probably requested to set your profile before the login procedure completed. your profile remains unset try setting it again when you are fully connected.
copy.
we use water for irrigation, cooking, washing and drinking.
but  i 'm a long-term investor  he says.
not allowed to write to output file.
duplicate /!
click select.
the soil will crumble and erode.
it has to weigh on the other hand the relatively high price of sugar it can earn on the export market in making decisions as to whether to produce sugar or alcohol  mr. oxnard said.
dash preset.
nothing was deleted.
moral and economic corruption has prevailed in the country.
mrs. ward says she often defended her to colleagues who called her a grandstander.
stillwater.
fan or stirrer.
phone/fax.
though emphasis was given on the development and expansion of the irrigation sector in the past periodic plans, its implementation part could not be effective.
print this calendar.
program name.
in the torrent of replies that followed one woman ringer from solihull observed that  the average male ringer leaves quite a lot to be desired *-141 : badly dressed decorated with acne and a large beer-belly frequently unwashed and unbearably flatulent in peals.
delete selected memos.
destination is read only.
choose playlist.
air transport  :  prior to 1960,  the country had a total of 12 airfields with 1 metalled and 11 fair weather type.
p.o. box.
provided but current element does not have type.
the music share requires a password to connect.
warning.
network.
receptivity.
america/recife.
tool tip.
shadow group  no administrative user.
in view of the government financial situation of the last two years, the reliance on external loans has further accentuated instead of declining because of the need for adjusting the financial deficit caused by increasing government expenditure.
is before.
server overloaded.
brindisi.
could not open ' '.
similarly, a commission was formed to undertake a detailed study of the civil servantsâ€™ pay scales and make necessary recommendations in order to raise the moral of the civil servants and increase their workperformance.
could not acquire window manager selection on screen display.
menomonie.
enable sound server startup.
is not a valid room handle.
connect.
the following extra packages will be installed.
preferences.
active processes.
cut.
infinite line.
always store transformation as a transform attribute on objects.
width of the rectangle to be filled.
the dispute has hampered the administration 's efforts to recruit prominent doctors to fill prestigious posts at the helm of the nih and the centers for disease control.
similarly, the capacity utilization of sugar and cigarette industries was 69 and 66 percent respectively.
interior focus.
could not create lock file for.
preston g. foster birmingham ala.
the warnings issued to at least 100 criminal defense attorneys in several major cities in the last week have led to an outcry by members of the organized bar who claim the information is protected by attorney-client privilege.
whether the item should receive extra space when the toolbar grows.
mr. stronach will direct an effort to reduce overhead and curb capital spending  until a more satisfactory level of profit is achieved and maintained  magna said.
isoceles triangle.
scale tool scale the layer, selection or path.
6.2 balance of payments situation the foreign trade and balance of payment situation was used to be taken in isolation till 1970.
copy the selected folder into another folder.
background full height set.
create new image.
evince is free software you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the gnu general public license as published by the free software foundation either version 2 of the license, or at your option any later version.
paragraph background color name.
digitizing board.
contributes.
add corner.
celtic.
blend.
unable to find a version for the package.
hardware.
volume of channel on.
button release.
exclude files.
displays the preferences configuration dialog.
carmi.
accessible parent.
morelia.
enter passphrase.
whether this tag affects the font weight.
we can see many rivers, rivulares, brooks, streams, fall, lakes and small springs.
antialiasing.
alpha threshold.
you trust the owner.
revert to the last saved version of document changes will be lost.
people from different castes and religions live here in mutual cooperation and friendly environment.
select monitor color profile.
for fiscal 1989 the company posted net of $ 734.9 million or $ 2.87 a share down from $ 811.9 million or $ 3.04 a share in fiscal 1988.
detach tab.
central and south america.
/tools/room list.
firewall.
no one is more unhappy with program trading than the nation 's stockbrokers.
valley federal is currently being examined by regulators.
unexpectedly empty tree title after.
asia/dhaka.
authentication is required to hibernate the system.
don't become a daemon.
deer park.
windows.
if you continue, you will not be able to recover these messages.
not withstanding the fact that without people's faith and commitment no planned development can manifest into meaningful reality and nor can any sustainable change oriented to people's welfare be brought about in the economic structure, a revolutionary economic programme of land reform was introduced in the very beginning of the panchayat regime.
the image has an embedded color profile.
line you want to move the cursor to.
could not be found.
mr. broberg who started with the now-defunct washington senators says that when he left baseball in 1978 he  never looked back.
bad binary format string in interpreter file.
all these factors hindered a substantial growth in revenue surplus.
general preferences.
ann arbor.
the water that was provided was also not available in required quantities.
the earth is a dynamic entity that is undergoing changes all the time.
map object.
show a window that lets you set your desktop background's pattern or color.
new path.
length unit.
smile.
at tokyo the nikkei index of 225 selected issues which gained 132 points tuesday added 14.99 points to 35564.43.
infrastructure development.
magnatune store.
beatrice.
text direction.
icon for this window.
last selected color.
providence.
restoring from the folder.
so efforts * to beat the tests are also on the rise.
switch to tab 12.
rotate right.
american express co. and general motors corp. 's beleaguered buick division are joining forces in a promotion aimed at boosting buick 's sales while encouraging broader use of the american express card.
hiragana.
reed is paying an interim dividend of 4.6 pence up 15  from 4 pence a year earlier.
curve bend.
error in gimp brush file.
at another point during the hearing rep. markey asked mr. phelan what would be discussed at a new york exchange board meeting today.
indian/kerguelen.
mark as unread.
antialias.
use font in the label in font info mode.
a gdkpixmap to display.
but in one of the auctions in question international business machines corp. made a bid substantially higher than the fujitsu offer according to the municipality.
the supply of water, in areas where the facility exists, too, has not been able to meet the requirement.
repeat mode.
mosinee.
transaction failed.
on the monetary front, there has been an excessive increase in money supply since the last year.
can not run.
rain showers.
stream error.
la baie.
flowed text is created.
as a result upjohn will likely trim only about 275 to 350 of its more than 21,000 jobs world-wide.
adds a small box to the buddy list that shows if you have new mail.
but other than the fact that besuboru is played with a ball and a bat it 's unrecognizable : fans politely return foul balls to stadium ushers ; the strike zone expands depending on the size of the hitter ; ties are permitted even welcomed since they honorably sidestep the shame of defeat ; players must abide by strict rules of conduct even in their personal lives players for the tokyo giants for example must always wear ties when on the road.
hancock.
contrast.
you 're not going to stop the idea of trading a basket of stocks  says *t*-1 vanderbilt 's prof. stoll.
apply currently selected fractal.
unlock document.
mr. hahn also has engineered a surprising turnaround of georgia-pacific.
beauvais.
odd character expected an open quote mark after the equals sign when giving value for attribute of element.
asia/amman.
randomize.
display line numbers.
they would also be glad for the freedom that the holidays will bring.
search offset objects.
whether the hidden files and folders should be displayed.
indian/mauritius.
sent to calendar as canceled.
with due date.
the problem has been further compounded by the fact that the agricultural labour force has to rely excessively on the monsoon.
commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp. : 8.55  30 to 44 days ; 8.25  45 to 59 days ; 8.40  60 to 89 days ; 8  90 to 119 days ; 7.90  120 to 149 days ; 7.80  150 to 179 days ; 7.55  180 to 270 days.
the latter seem be sustainable as repair, maintenance and operation works in such projects are carried out by the users themselves.
level detector.
the people were despaired of their aspirations, enthusiasm and zeal to participate in development efforts by this process, which thus created a setback to local development.
drag and drop is not supported.
config database not specified in config file.
paris brussels and milan were closed for a holiday.
whether the window should be decorated by the window manager.
today about $ 200 billion or 20  of all pension-fund stock investments is held by index funds.
a little about me.
stony rapids.
show or hide the commands bar under the menu.
use default.
mr. lieberman said the diverse showing in yesterday 's reports  only enhances the importance of the employment data.
search backwards for the same text.
a system log viewer for gnome.
citation highlight color.
open document.
remove sample point.
activity step.
cannot check folder.
assets of the 400 taxable funds grew by $ 1.5 billion during the latest week to $ 352.7 billion.
compact.
evolution website.
sybase replication server.
unknown option.
besides messrs. cray and barnum other senior management at the company includes neil davenport 47 president and chief executive officer ; joseph m. blanchard 37 vice president engineering ; malcolm a. hammerton 40 vice president software ; and douglas r. wheeland 45 vice president hardware.
guaymas.
you are leaving the graphical boot menu and starting the text mode interface.
contact editor.
level of user activity required.
chat.
interface.
appearance of the shadow surrounding the arrow.
display path to configuration file.
sintra.
the czech dam ca n't be operated solely at peak periods without the nagymaros project.
clear all operations.
the following information may help to resolve the situation.
bitrate.
good health is important because a man of health can enjoy great happiness during his life time.
network diagram objects.
a sample plugin in vala with no features.
open tank.
these factors have impeded the attainment of stability in the growth of export.
topic new topic view or change the channel topic.
decomposition.
open in navigation window.
bibliography.
horizontal adjustment.
goiânia.
these days banking customers walk in the door expecting you to have a package especially for them  ms. moore says.
post message to list.
music player.
autosave files every.
kingman.
accept chat invitation?
it has provided us with so many things which have made our life comfortable and more advanced.
top attachment.
command line arguments error, please use help option to see the usage.
redistribute handles in selection.
the rating concern said the textile and clothing company 's interest expense exceeds operating profit  by a wide margin  and it noted united 's estimated after-tax loss of $ 24 million for the year ended june 30.
are you sure you want to delete this task?
cyprus.
view and select font family, font size and other text properties.
undo last action.
najran.
next chapter/movie.
a more recent novel  norwegian wood  every japanese under 40 seems to be fluent in beatles lyrics has sold more than four million copies since kodansha published it in 1987.
dashdot.
truevision targa image.
no encryption.
the limit lapses under current exchange rules if contracts trade above the limit price during the opening 10 minutes of trading.
replies and parents.
confirm expunge.
configure image grid.
image map plugin.
no longer requiring the installation of version.
you were disconnected from the server.
tarapoto.
drawing maze.
bentonville.
rotate left.
area settings.
graphics.
seek.
black joker.
the jack of diamonds.
industry, tourism and electricity 2.
hearst had flirted with a conversion to tabloid format for years but never executed the plan.
how to draw the input method preedit string.
it was enjoyable to hear accomplished jazz without having to sit in a smoke-filled club but like the first half much of it was easy to take and ultimately forgettable.
octogon. eight sided shape.
align.
the construction of roads co uld not be completed as required nor could the economy derive maximum benefits from the constructed roads because of the excessive increase in the cost of road construction and the lack of timely repair and maintenance.
campbell officials said mr. mcgovern was n't available yesterday to discuss the circumstances of his departure.
wile for the lack of decentralization in real terms, many projects aimed at integrated rural development with international assistance could not deliver meaningful results, many projects, as the studies have revealed, created a negative outlook towards development at the local level.
use preview label.
at the economic growth rate of 5.1 percent, the government revenue will increase by 9.7 percent, but the share of negative savings will continue to be high due to its increasing trend in the past.
the model for the icon view.
navigate the image display.
farmers' field channels will continue to be improved with the users' participation by arranging necessary technical assistance.
distorted.
reset parameters to default values.
passed.
enable environment mapping.
maintainer is not.
change the color lightness by this percentage for each row.
flip selected objects vertically.
resize the page to fit the current selection, or the entire drawing if there is no selection.
ortega ended a truce with the contras and said elections were threatened.
if true, the window is modal other windows are not usable while this one is up.
says the organization 's founder john cannell prosecuting mrs. yeargin is  a way for administrators to protect themselves and look like they take cheating seriously when in fact they do n't take it seriously at all.
halfwidth and fullwidth forms.
it adds to the joy and excitement of mankind.
manufacturers ' backlogs of unfilled orders rose 0.5  in september to $ 497.34 billion *u* helped by strength in the defense capital goods sector.
memos.
in october more people said that present business conditions were  good  than in september.
switch to workspace 4.
in the past year both have tried to stretch the limits of their businesses.
resulting guide bounds ,to ,areas.
specifies the width of the log viewer main window in pixels.
there is this danger also in information technology.
new contact.
lock selection to image edges.
unable to change to.
certificate signature value.
as regards the sale and distribution of production inputs in f.y. 1990/91, 72,719 metric tons of chemical fertilizers and 2,325 metric tons of seeds were sold.
many parents admit that they slog at work so that thy could provided comfort and stability to their offspring.
warn when attempting to perform a privileged action as a nonroot user.
but neither of us can copy the material on a xerox machine or have it sent to us.
name of the themed icon for this window.
no such command.
apple ii owners for example had to use their television sets as screens and stored data on audiocassettes.
16 bits.
mr. nichol said he was  extremely disappointed in the continuing deterioration of the company 's operations while it attempted to conclude the reorganization during the past four months.
color balance tool adjust color distribution.
above all mr. oxnard noted the situation is extremely confused.
is important.
keyboard stop.
error retrieving profile.
the firmness in heating oil was attributed to colder weather in parts of the u.s. and to the latest weekly report by the american petroleum institute which showed a decline in inventories of the fuel.
document statistics.
sofia.
builtinfunction keyword.
it also asks them to add two-sevenths and three-sevenths.
rear left.
delete the selected partition.
thus, though electricity generation and distribution was increased, the burden arising from the excessive per unit cost of electricity due to completed projects being very expensive fell upon the consumers.
the diversion path is too long.
move to workspace left.
postscript documents.
remove.
flow conditional.
completion date.
in transforming certain date related to financial position to constant prices, the use of the urban consumer price indices rather than that of implicit deflators of gdp in more practical.
we 're in a very different regulatory environment.
match indices must be 1 or greater, not.
companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates.
filter the selected messages for junk status.
keyboard shortcut to switch to tab 3.
failed to fork.
unicode.
really delete file ?
completely randomize a fraction of pixels.
science has created a wonderful world for us.
profit may be low but at least costs should be covered.
what is society but a collection of individuals?
board size.
a value between 0.0 and 1.0 indicating how much to darken the background image. 0.0 means no darkness, 1.0 means fully dark. in the current implementation, there are only two levels of darkness possible, so the setting behaves as a boolean, where 0.0 disables the darkening effect.
blending function for selection.
destinations are chicago ; honolulu ; las vegas nev. ; los angeles ; miami beach fla. ; new orleans ; new york ; orlando fla. ; san francisco ; and washington d.c. a buyer who chooses to fly to his destination must pay for his own ticket but gets a companion 's ticket free if they fly on united airlines.
rotate.
unable to load imageloading module.
must specify a key to lookup size of.
whitehead.
simulate the glowing boundary of a neon light.
warning invalid or missing type for schema.
key properties.
a tree, of whatever kind is a wonderful of nature.
video.
río gallegos.
rms said it had a loss of $ 158,666 or 10 cents a share in the third quarter compared with a year-earlier loss of $ 26,956 or two cents a share.
preview.
bzip2 compressed file.
europe/prague.
clipping.
about the gnome desktop.
blocked.
the squeaky rubber gnome.
los alamos.
syndicate officials at lead underwriter salomon brothers inc. said the debentures were snapped by up pension funds banks insurance companies and other institutional investors.
according to the national planning commission estimates based on the assessment of available data, the percentage of the people living below the poverty line is put at about 49 percent.
